In the absence of contemporary written records, the skills and methods of
archaeology are our principal assistants in the study of the pre-history of any
region in the world.1
 The archaeologist can now also call upon the services of
specialists in such diverse fields as cultural anthropology,2
 geology,3
 and
climatic4
 and genetic studies5
 to shed further light on the interpretation of his
available data. The cumulative results of archaeological and other researches
over the last two centuries have been highly impressive; and, while controversies
over the significance of this or that piece of evidence will always continue, we
now at least possess a great amount of scientific evidence to probe into questions
relating to pre-history. Among such questions that arise while studying the
pre-history of India and South Asia, the following are of particular interest:
When did the first humans emerge in those regions? What tools did they
make? What was their socio-economic lifestyle? At what stage did they take
up farming? When do we get the first pointers to urban civilisation in the subcontinent? The answers are frequently unclear because research in this area is
still much in progress. On the basis of what is available, however, this chapter
attempts to address the questions in three settlement phases.
Earliest phases of human settlement and activity
A critical stage in human evolution took place some 6 million years ago when
our remotest ancestors, acquiring skills of bipedal locomotion (walking on two
feet), emerged in Africa, descended from primates. Palaeontologists (students
of animal and human fossils) and archaeologists call them by the term hominin.
Different species of hominins co-existed for the next 3.5 million years, but
around.2.5 million years ago we find evidence of the first tool-using members
from their lineage in eastern and southern Africa.6
 These tool-using hominins
continued to evolve inside Africa, and developed into three branches, known as
Homo habilis, Homo ergaster and Homo erectus.
7
 The more enterprising members
of the last two began to issue out of Africa just over 1 million years ago, reaching as far as Europe, West Asia, East Asia and the Indonesian islands.8
 It would,
however, be wrong to conclude that there were no tool-using hominins in
places outside Africa before 1 million years ago; the fossil remains of hominins
From Africa to Mehrgarh 23
such as Sivapithecus and Ramapithecus have been discovered in the northern
regions of the sub-continent; also, the recent discovery, in northwest Pakistan,
of a chopping tool that is 2 million years old suggests that the dating of human
ancestry is an evolving subject;9
 it would be imprudent to be too categorical
with the dates.
The culmination of the long period of evolution, adaptation and diffusion
by the pre-human species such as the Australopithecines and the three hominin
branches was reached when our own species, Homo sapiens, modern humans
biologically similar to us, emerged around 400,000 years ago.10 There are two
conflicting hypotheses for the origin of Homo sapiens. One holds to the multiregional model of human origin, which asserts that Homo sapiens arose gradually
from the Homo erectus populations in different regions of the world.11 The other
model, known as the Out of Africa hypothesis, asserts that over thousands of
years the African humanity, in the form of Homo erectus and later Homo sapiens,
spread to other parts of the world and dominated all other species12 (see Extract
2.1). Both theories have their champions, but the relative abundance of the
African fossil remains and sophisticated research into the history of human
genes13 increasingly point to an African origin for modern humans, including
South Asians.14 Most probably, Homo erectus might have moved, in significant
numbers, from Africa to South Asia via West Asia around 500,000 years ago.
Homo sapiens, on the other hand, arrived much later in the sub-continent from
two directions and over two different time-sequences. One was the traditional
route through West Asia, around 30,000 years ago; but an earlier group could
have landed around 50,000 years ago on the shores of south India while on
their sea journey towards the Andaman Islands, Indonesia and the Australasian
archipelagos.15 The entire subject of the first settlements of Homo sapiens in
different parts of the world is wholly fascinating, but new theories, particularly
from genetic studies, will undoubtedly help us to obtain further insights. We
are, of course, still undecided about the sequence of the peopling of India and
South Asia, but there can be no doubt that the South Asian Homo sapiens has
truly flourished and multiplied in the region. The Indian sub-continent holds
the largest areal concentrations of humanity in the world today.
By 100,000 years ago, the Homo sapiens species had shown its dominance
throughout the known world, replacing all other Homo genera. Archaeology
comes into its own when, from the later hominins onwards, we see signs of the
advancing material culture of stone tools. In time, the artefacts become more
complex, as with pottery. In their search and analysis of fossils, human or animal, tools and artefacts, whether of the most primitive kind or of a sophisticated
design, archaeologists generally employ three recognised procedures. One is
known as typological classification, by which the similarities and differences
among the tools and artefacts are analysed.16 Another is stratigraphy, by which
the layers and strata of the ground are studied.17 Materials found at deeper
levels below the ground, for example, could indicate the remains of an older
chronological period, as the levels get covered by the debris of successive
generations. Each layer is numbered in relation to a chronological period, and
24 From Africa to Mehrgarh
the deepest level, containing the oldest of materials, is treated as Period I. The
third important procedure concerns dating, of which there are a variety of
methods, such as spectrometric dating of the materials earlier than 10,000
years ago18 and radio-carbon dating,19 dendro-chronology20 and thermoluminescence21 for dating objects from the last 10,000 years. Archaeological
procedures and the researches from other sciences have combined, over the last
150 years, to shed much light on the earliest humans and their activities.
The Palaeolithic era
The pre-historic period for all regions of the world is characterised by the
gradual increase in the human ability to shape tools from stone, which is why
most of the pre-historic period, from the time of the first tool-making hominins
2.5 million years ago, is called the Stone Age. Owing to the difficulties posed
in studying such a long period, archaeologists have divided it into three parts:
Old (or Palaeolithic), Middle (or Mesolithic) and New (Neolithic) Stone Ages.
The Palaeolithic, being the longest of the three, is itself further sub-divided
into three sub-periods, Lower Palaeolithic (or the earliest period of the Old
Stone Age), Middle Palaeolithic and Upper Palaeolithic (the most recent
period of the Old Stone Age). The period divisions do not apply uniformly to
all parts of the world because, owing to factors such as time lag, climatic
vagaries, great distances or numerous geographical and physical barriers, the
peoples in different regions of the world progressed at varying paces. We can
affirm that Africa was the first region in the world to display characteristics of
the Lower Palaeolithic; but that approximates the limits of our chronology.
Even today there are isolated groups of people whose skills lie essentially in
working with stone artefacts and who are considered as still living in the Stone
Age. The Stone Age, theoretically, comes to an end when human beings start
working with metals such as copper, tin and iron.
In the context of Indian and South Asian history, we may be justified in
saying that the Stone Age began around 500,000 years ago, assuming that the
tool-making members of Homo erectus had then arrived, and that it lasted until
at least the third millennium bc, when we come across copper objects from the
Harappan Civilisation. The remains of the earliest homo species yet found in
the sub-continent, Narmada Man, are actually only about 250,000 years old,22
while those of the earliest Homo sapiens, found in Sri Lanka, date to 34,000
years.23 The Palaeolithic era of the Stone Age lasted the longest, stretching until
about 26,000 bc.
24 Although we have very little evidence of human remains
from most of the Palaeolithic era,25 the remains of fauna fossils have been
recovered in great numbers, giving vital clues to researchers about climatic
conditions and their effects on landscapes; we also have a variety of stone
implements from all the sub-periods of the Palaeolithic era, unearthed from
different sites in South Asia (see Map 2.1). The two predominant utensils of
the Lower Palaeolithic era were pebble tools and hand axes. Extensive deposits
of pebble tools and choppers were discovered in the Soan river valley in
From Africa to Mehrgarh 25
Pakistan, and the hoards found there and at other sites are known as the Soan
Culture.26 The hand axes were first discovered near Chennai (Madras) by a
British archaeologist, Robert Bruce-Foote, in 1863, and so the hand-axe assemblage is generally known as Madrasian Culture.27 From the Middle Palaeolithic
era we have many flake tools, cores, scrapers and borers; despite regional
variations, they constitute a tool culture known as Nevasan Culture, named
after the Nevasa site in the valley of the Godavari river in the Deccan.28 The
skills of giving a sharper cutting edge to all the various stone tools, resulting in
finer blades and burins, were perfected later in the Upper Palaeolithic era. A
collection of these later tools was found at the site of Patne in Maharashtra.29
Map 2.1 Pre-historic sites.
Soan Valley
Culture area (LP)
Burzahum (N)
Kot Diji (EH)
Amri (EH)
Kalibangan (EH)
Chirand (N)
Koldihawa (N)
Langnaj (M)
Bhimbetka (MP, UP, M)
Adamgarh (M)
Patne (MP) Nevasa
(MP)
Madrasian
Culture area
(LP)
Utnur (N)
Key
(LP) = Lower Palaeolithic
(MP) = Middle Palaeolithic
(UP) = Upper Palaeolithic
(M) = Mesolithic
(N) = Neolithic
(EH) = Early Harappa
200 miles
300 km
Rehman Dheri (N)
Rana Gundai (N, EH)
Mehrgarh (N, EH)
Harappa (EH)
Gufkral (N)
Chopani Mando
(N)
Mahadaha (M)
Damdama (M)
Sarai Naharrai (M)
Mohenjo Daro (MH) Balakot N, EH)
Bagor (M)
Mahagara (N)
Kili Gul Mohammad (N)
(N, EH)
26 From Africa to Mehrgarh
The evidence of tools and fossils suggests clearly, however, that the Palaeolithic
people remained essentially hunter-gatherers throughout that long period.
They hunted and scavenged, collecting berries, roots and fruits of all kinds
that grew in the wild. Mostly they lived in nomadic fashion in open spaces, but
also used caves for shelter and protection. There is one remote piece of evidence
that may help us to reconstruct a picture of their social life in the Upper
Palaeolithic age.30 This consists of a few of the earliest cave paintings at
Bhimbetka on the bank of the Narmada river in central India, depicting scenes
of hunting and fertility symbols. Otherwise there is nothing except fossils,
pebble tools and hand axes.
The Mesolithic era
The transition from the Palaeolithic to the Mesolithic witnessed the emergence
of a new type of stone tool known as the microlith. Although small in size, this
was a superior implement. A typical microlith kit would consist of tiny microblades, triangles, trapezes, crescents and arrowheads, all extremely sharp at
their cutting face and truly effective weapons.31 The earliest evidence of these
microliths in South Asia comes from sites in Sri Lanka dating back to 26,000
bc.
32 The sites on the Indian mainland that have been explored in detail include
Bagor in Rajasthan, Langnaj in Gujarat, Sarai Nahar Rai, Mahadaha and
Damdama in the Gangetic plains, and Adamgarh, Bhimbetka and Ghagharia
in central India.33 The microliths, found at all these sites, date from a much
more recent period than 26,000 bc. The microlith helps us to interpret life in
the Mesolithic as an advance on the Palaeolithic. The microlith was functionally
a more useful tool than a large stone pebble because it could be hafted to many
other tools, for instance to make knives or scissors. By the use of arrowheads
too animals could be killed from a distance, reducing the chance of their attacking the hunter.34 The production of microliths depended upon the availability
of stones that could be easily flaked, such as quartz, chert, or other types of
chalcedony (precious stones). As pebble stones became less important, a shift
in habitat, from river sites to hills and forests, can be detected.35 Seasonal mobility has also been noticed in relation to the movement of people between the
Gangetic plains and the Vindhya escarpments in central India. Animals
generally moved during the winter from the plains to the hills, and the people
followed game, taking shelter in hill caves. The reverse movement occurred
during the hot season, when the people would be able to augment their subsistence with the plant resources of the plains.36 The discovery of many querns and
stone rings at different sites attest to a primitive form of cultivation. Ring
stones were probably used as weights on the ends of digging sticks. Animal
bones of cows, sheep and goats found in the habitation areas indicate the
domestication of animals; but the bones of such other animals as deer, boar and
ostrich have also been found among adjacent debris. Within a number of habitation areas are burial sites containing skeletal remains as well as grave goods
such as microliths, shells and even an ivory pendant. This suggests a belief in
From Africa to Mehrgarh 27
an afterlife or some form of status consciousness.37 We cannot be sure. Human
remains have been studied, and some of them show signs of osteoarthritis.38
There were, however, some burial sites which were just in middens with
rubbish, as in Sri Lanka. Good examples of rock art, accurately depicting
animal bodies and human figures, have been discovered across a wide extent of
the Indian landscape, at cave sites as far afield as Kerala and Kashmir. At
Bhimbetka, in central India, however, a unique continuity of rock-art tradition
can be noticed from the Palaeolithic period onwards, and there is greater sophistication demonstrated during the Mesolithic and the Neolithic periods.39
The Neolithic Revolution and the rise of agriculture
Although there was no clear-cut shift from hunter-gathering to farming, a
transition was gradually but clearly occurring in four or five regions of the
world around 8000 bc. This happened after the end of what is known as the
Pleistocene era or the Last Ice Age. The retreat of the ice ushered in post-glacial
times, the most recent of climatic eras, known as the Holocene epoch. From
the archaeological perspective, it was in the Holocene period that the New
Stone Age began. The new venture of farming is sometimes referred to as the
Neolithic Revolution, a major landmark in human history, when men and
women in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, China and parts of South Asia
began to domesticate plants and animals and learn about crops and seasons.40
The stone tools of the New Stone Age, such as polished ground-stone axes,
stone sickles, hammer stones and stone blades, were also far more varied and
efficient than those of the earlier periods. The evidence from the Neolithic
sites, however, suggests that farming, pastoralism and the establishment of
settlements did not all emerge simultaneously; developments occurred gradually and, at some times, the old and the new co-existed for a very long period
before the new supplanted the old.41 In the Indian and South Asian context the
earliest archaeological evidence of the Neolithic period dates back to almost
11,000 bc, the end of the Ice Age; but the evidence for farming and domestication of animals ranges between 7000 bc and 1000 bc at different sites. It is,
arguably, also believed that the very first farmers of South Asia, in Baluchistan,
might have come from Mesopotamia and the Fertile Crescent.42
Main Neolithic regional concentrations
The Neolithic sites are spread out across the sub-continent, but there are four
particular concentrations of sites that help us identify regional similarities and
dissimilarities.43 The first concentration of Neolithic farming villages is found
in Baluchistan, in the vicinity of the Bolan river and its pass that links the
uplands with the plains of the River Indus. The remains of mud-built
structures, chert blades, barley and wheat seeds, and bones of sheep, goats and
cattle provide the clearest evidence of the development of a farming and
pastoral community in this part of the sub-continent. The key site is that of
28 From Africa to Mehrgarh
the village of Mehrgarh, where, since the 1970s, extensive archaeological
excavations have unearthed some of the earliest strata dating back to 7000
bc.
44 The other linked sites are those of Kili Gul Mohammad and Rana
Ghundai. The second concentration of sites is to be found in the Kashmir and
Swat valleys of Pakistan. At sites such as Burzahom and Gufkral there is
evidence present of Neolithic farming settlements, consisting of the usual
Neolithic implements, ceramics and faunal remains. Additionally, there have
been discovered peculiar bell-shaped pits, nearly 15 feet in diameter and 13
feet in depth. It has been suggested that these pits served as underground
dwellings for humans or as burial hoard sites, and that the people here might
have had links with the Central Asian Neolithic communities that dug similar
pits.45 This is still a subject of speculation among the excavators, some of whom
think that the pits could have been grain stores or merely gigantic refuse
dumps.46 The third concentration of sites is located in a very wide area covering
the Gangetic basin and stretching into eastern India. Here some of the Neolithic remains are pre-farming sites, indicating a continuity of the Mesolithic
and the Neolithic eras. At certain sites, however, such as Chopani Mando,
Mahagara, Koldihawa and Chirand, we have distinct evidence of farming and
domestication of animals taking place around the fourth millennium bc. The
remains of rice grains have been found, but there is continuing debate as to
whether rice cultivation was an indigenous development or whether it entered
the sub-continent from East and Southeast Asia sometime during the second
millennium bc47 (see Extract 2.2). The fourth regional concentration of Neolithic sites is south India. There, at such a site as Utnur, huge deposited ashmounds have been found. Most probably, there were stockades where cattle
were seasonally brought and tamed, and the ash-mounds could be the result of
the burning of successive phases of stockades or pens. In the many open-air
settlements of south India traditional Neolithic tools such as polished stone
axes and stone blades, along with the remains of pulses, millets and local
tubers, provide evidence of a distinct regional farming and pastoral culture.48
The socio-economic consequences of agriculture
Some of the consequences of the rise of agriculture applied universally. One of
them was a sharper divergence between the nomadic ways of the huntergatherers and the sedentary lifestyle of the cultivators of land. The latter
became increasingly dominant in all areas as, compared with the efforts of the
hunter-gatherers, they garnered greater rewards for themselves by more intensive use of a limited amount of land.49 Technological innovations too, such as
irrigation, ploughing and, much later on in India, terracing in hill regions,
helped produce sizeable surpluses of food; and this, with the general predictability of food supplies, resulted in the increase of the agricultural population.
Yet it would take many millennia after 7000 bc before the hunter-gatherers
became truly marginal figures in the Indian landscape.50 For a long time the
farmers and hunter-gatherers maintained contacts, because the former needed
From Africa to Mehrgarh 29
forest produce and honey. As agriculture involved both cultivation of land and
the nurturing of domesticated animals, the cultivators co-laboured seasonally
with the settled and semi-nomadic pastoralists. After the harvest the herders
brought their cattle, sheep and goats to feed on the stubble, and the animal
manure helped to fertilise the land. The barter of essential items normally took
place between the cultivators and the pastoralists. Both materially benefited
through the exchange of surplus cereals, milk, meat and animal skins.51 In
time, the surplus came to be exchanged with the artefacts and produce of those
who were neither peasants nor pastoralists but craftsmen. And eventually the
process of exchange came to be increasingly facilitated by another class of
people, the traders. While the hunter-gatherers lived a day-to-day existence,
the agriculturists could enjoy incremental levels of prosperity. The remains of
pots and pans, beads, shells and assorted jewellery that have been discovered in
Baluchistan and the Indus basin, the very first areas of farming in South Asia,
testify to this diversity from at least the sixth millennium bc.
52 Agriculture
helped to establish permanent habitations and settlements that, in turn,
became identified with the founding of communities. The concepts of identity,
ethnicity and ancestry became meaningful in the context of agricultural communities.53 Within such communities family kinship became a unifying factor
among groups bound by marriage ties; and within families there emerged
gifted or powerful personalities, on whom the task of leadership devolved. The
development of hereditary leadership could also be traced to this stage. The
social complexity became more marked with status-seeking by particular
families within a community. The remains of grave goods are an indication of
this particular trend. A negative element of the social complexity engendered
by settled agricultural communities was warfare.54 The main contentious issue
was land. In contrast to the hunter-gatherers, who roamed over vast tracts of
land that belonged to no particular clans, the agriculturists had to be protective
of their land, or risk losing it to raiding parties of nomadic pastoralists or other
enemy clans. The remains of defensive enclosures or skeletons of bodies impaled
with weapons indicate degrees of violent conflict among both Neolithic and
post-Neolithic agricultural people.
The Early Harappan phase: proto-urban settlements of the
late Neolithic period
While Neolithic farming communities and villages have been found in four
different regions of the sub-continent, as noted above, their transformation
into proto-urban dwellers took place essentially in the northwest, particularly
in the Indus region. This process takes us into the first phase of the Harappan
Civilisation: the Early Harappan phase, also called the Era of Regionalisation,
which was a prelude to its mature phase. The term ‘Harappan’, referring to the
great city-settlement of Harappa in the Punjab, is frequently used to describe
collectively the styles and features of monuments and artefacts from the entire
Harappan/Indus Civilisation to which the city belonged. Since the antecedents
30 From Africa to Mehrgarh
of this civilisation go back into the late Neolithic times, the development of
village settlements into proto-urban forms may be said to be part of the story
of the Early Harappan period. It was believed, almost until the mid-twentieth
century, that the urban civilisation of the Indus could not have developed
indigenously; and that it must have had foreign origins, probably Mesopotamian. The archaeological researches since the 1970s have disproved this thesis.55
The early archaeologists had paid little attention to the varying ecological and
geographical conditions of many different sites in the entire northwest zone,
and the focus of their research was very much on the metropolitan cities themselves rather than on the evolution of human occupation before the rise of the
cities. Many post-war archaeologists, however, excavated at different and
remote sites and, after uncovering layer after layer of habitation levels, have
provided us with a unique understanding of the historical sequences of the
evolution of human societies before mature urbanism took place. They have
shown how, at a number of sites throughout the area, the people of the northwest of the Indian sub-continent ultimately progressed from a Neolithic state
of existence to a fine urban cultural lifestyle of the Copper/Bronze Chalcolithic
Age. The roots of the Indus cities lie, therefore, not outside the sub-continent
but within.
Within the northwest the relevant areas for understanding the rural to urban
transition are Baluchistan (key sites being Mehrgarh, Kili Gul Mohammad,
Rana Ghundai and Balakot), Sind (key sites being Amri and Kot Diji), the
plains of western Punjab (key site of Harappa), the Gomal valley (key site of
Rehman Dheri) and the Ghaggar–Hakra valley (key site of Kalibangan) that
runs through the states of Rajasthan and Haryana in modern India. These sites
were more than villages, and the clues to their incipient urbanism lie in the
relative sizes of their ground plans, the remains of foundations of their houses
and streets, and the varied types of pottery manufactures (see Figure 2.1),
household effects, tools and valuable grave goods. These sites most often lay on
or near agriculturally fertile land and along the trade routes. Chronologically
speaking, they vary in antiquity. There is a general consensus among the archaeologists that the Mature Harappan period lasted from about 2600 to 1900 bc,
and that the development phase before 2600 bc should be designated as Early
Harappan, not pre-Harappan, because of the continuity of the tradition.56 On
the other hand, it would be too simplistic to call the very early farming phase
in the sixth millennium as Early Harappan. A compromise could be that the
time-span of about 7000 to 4500 bc should be called the Baluchistan phase,
because of the importance of Mehrgarh; that the years 4500 to 3500 bc be
considered an age of transition; and the years from about 3500 to 2600 bc be
called the Early Harappan phase57 or, according to the American historian Jim
Shaffer, an Era of Regionalisation.58 Although an increasing amount of data are
available from many sites, chosen here are four sites – Amri, Kot Diji, Kalibangan and Mehrgarh – which provide differential evidence of proto-urban
features in the Early Harappan period (c. 3500–2600 bc).
From Africa to Mehrgarh 31
Evidence from three proto-urban sites: Amri, Kot Diji and
Kalibangan
Amri, the first of these four sites, is situated about 160 kilometres to the south
of Mohenjo Daro on the west bank of the Indus. It was excavated throughout
the 1960s, and four clear periods were distinguished from the diggings. Period I
(c. 3500 to 3000 bc), the earliest phase, is known as the Amri Culture.59 Among
the ruins of very rough, low-level rectangular houses with mud flooring, which
were just a few inches higher than the outside level, have been found red
earthenware jars, black and red hand-moulded pottery and a few scraps of
copper, blades, bangles and stone tools. Definite advances in pottery styles and
the design of houses are noticeable from Period II (3000 to 2700 bc). Period
III was when Amri was part of the Indus Civilisation, during the Mature
Harappan age, lasting from about 2700 to 2400 bc, when it reached its high
point of urbanism. It was the time when larger houses, constructed from adobe
Figure 2.1 Early Harappan pottery fragments (Pat Baker: line drawings adapted from
 Gregory Possehl, The Indus Age, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
 Press, 1999, pp. 500–1, 577, 641).
32 From Africa to Mehrgarh
bricks of standardised design, were built and wheel-turned pottery, with
strong individualistic design styles, was popular.60 The rise of Mohenjo Daro,
however, was bound to lead to the eclipse of sites like Amri, and in Period IV,
or the Late Harappan period, the evidence points to an overall decline. From
the four archaeological periods of Amri we can trace a sequence of styles, skills
and developments that document for us the pointers towards the Indus
Civilisation.
The site of Kot Diji in Sindh also provides us with unique examples of a
culture developing into an urban form. Here firstly, between about 3200 and
2600 bc, a major ceramic industry developed, and the Kot Diji ceramic style
reached sites as far apart as Rehman Dheri, Amri and Kalibangan. The conspicuous feature of this style was the wheel-thrown globular jar of red ware with
such decorative motifs as fish-scales and pipal leaves.61 The plain and painted
terracotta bangles, cattle figurines, cones, beads of semi-precious stones, and
many objects of shell and bone testify to a standard of living far advanced from
that of the people who inhabited the early Neolithic villages. Kot Diji possessed
an important feature of urbanism that both Amri and Mehrgarh lacked: a
fortified citadel complex, along with a lower town.62 This pattern of layout in
the central area of a settlement was a key pointer to similar planning at the
metropolitan sites of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa.
Kalibangan, in Rajasthan, nearly 300 kilometres northwest of Delhi, was a
key site on the banks of the now dry Ghaggar–Hakra river which once flowed
through Rajasthan and Haryana. Its maximum area would have covered
approximately 20 hectares, or 50 acres, of land.63 At no other site do we notice
the continuity between the late Neolithic proto-urban phase and the Indus
Civilisation more clearly than at Kalibangan. In its Mature Harappan phase, as
in Mohenjo Daro, the site possessed both a citadel mound and the lower town;
but archaeologists have also uncovered an Early Harappan settlement under
the citadel mound that indicates a similar ground plan.64 During this early
phase, which lasted from about 3000 to 2700 bc, the fortification wall was
made of mass-produced mud bricks of standard size and proportion. Both the
inner and the outer faces of this wall were plastered with mud. From the
foundation remains of houses it may be surmised that each house had three or
four rooms. Many useful household items such as ovens and storage pits have
been excavated. Some of the antiquities discovered include chalcedony blades,
carnelian, faience, gold and silver beads and pottery of various designs. The
predominant pottery was red or pink with black and white painting, and on
some of the pottery there was also non-scriptural graffiti that may be seen to
anticipate the Mature Harappan script.65
Evidence from Mehrgarh
Even more important than the above three locations is the site of Mehrgarh in
Baluchistan. Owing to the findings of major excavations there, in 1974, under
Jean-François Jarrige and his Franco-Pakistani team, Mehrgarh furnishes us
From Africa to Mehrgarh 33
with a perfect example of a site that links Neolithic society to the Mature
Harappan culture.66 Nowhere in the Indian sub-continent does a site exist
which allows us this unique glimpse into the previous 4,500 years before 2500
bc when Mohenjo Daro was at its zenith. The geographical position of
Mehrgarh is particularly worth examining. The site lies at the foot of the Bolan
Pass on the River Bolan, a tributary of the Indus, at a distance of 250 kilometres
northwest of Mohenjo Daro. This means that it belongs to the Indus drainage
system, although it is located within the Kachi plain of Baluchistan. The
alluvium and floodwaters of the Bolan river and Indus basin made the Mehrgarh
site suitable for farming. And since the Bolan Pass is, like the Khyber Pass, one
of the important access points between India and Afghanistan, Mehrgarh was
strategically located on a historical route that links the Indus valley with the
Iranian plateau, leading on to Central and West Asia.67 It is worth noting that
the discovery of some very early beadware of precious stone such as lapis lazuli
would indicate that the people of Mehrgarh were trading even during the
earliest period of their history.68 The Mehrgarh site consists of six mounds
spread over an area of approximately 500 acres. This was a large site, but as the
habitation focus shifted over time each period covered only a small section of
that. Archaeologists have named the oldest mound MR3, where they have
uncovered evidence of continuous human occupation from about 7000 to 4700
bc.
69 The greater antiquity of Mehrgarh’s Period I can be appreciated by
comparing it with that of Amri, whose Period I begins only at 3500 bc. After
Period I there were six other periods, bringing the chronology down to 2300
bc.
70 During their seven periods of history, until 2300 bc, the Mehrgarhians
were improving their skills and arts to a level that eventually matched that of
the Mature Harappa society. Their pottery, copper ware, figurines and various
other ornaments show a people striving towards a state of advancement and
perfection, by experimenting, innovating and improvising rather than by
imitating foreign models. Some of the oldest cotton seeds have been recovered
from the mounds of Mehrgarh, again raising the possibility of the first cottonmanufacturing processes occurring in the Indus zone.71 A recent report from
the Human Biology Department of the University of Rome also credits the
people of Mehrgarh with the skills of dentistry.72
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 2.1 The African origins of human beings
Until the 1960s, the multi-regional model of human origins long held
sway among scientists and anthropologists. Racial differences are perhaps
more easily explainable under the hypothesis of this model. It was also
argued that gene flow, or the introduction of new genes into regional
populations, helped to ensure that the evolving regional populations
were similar in reproductive and anatomical character and that they all
34 From Africa to Mehrgarh
belonged to a single Homo sapiens type. From the 1960s onwards, however,
researchers have become more convinced by the hypothesis of Africa
being the geographical cradle of human origins, as the following two
extracts explain.
The rise of modern humans is a recent drama that played out against a
long and complex backdrop of evolutionary diversification among the
hominids, but the fossil record shows that from the earliest times
Africa was consistently the centre from which new lineages of hominids sprang. Clearly, interesting evolutionary developments occurred
in both Europe and eastern Asia, but they involved populations that
were not only derived from but also eventually supplanted by
emigrants from Africa. In Africa our lineage was born and, ever since
its hominids were first emancipated from the forest edges, that continent has pumped out successive waves of emigrants to all parts of the
Old World.
Source: Ian Tattersall, ‘Out of Africa Again . . . and Again’, Scientific
American, 276, April 1997, pp. 60–67.
. . . all the genetic data shows the greatest number of polymorphisms
in Africa; there is simply far more variation in that continent than
anywhere else. You are more likely to sample extremely divergent
genetic lineages within a single African village than you are in the
whole of the rest of the world . . . Why does diversity indicate greater
age? [Taking the example of a hypothetical Provençal village, we
can ask] why do the bouillabaisse recipes change? Because in each
generation, a daughter decides to modify her soup in a minor way.
Over time, these small variations add up to an extraordinary amount
of diversity in the village’s kitchens. And – critically – the longer the
village has been accumulating these changes, the more diverse it is.
It is like a clock, ticking away in units of rosemary and thyme –
the longer it has been ticking, the more differences we see . . . when
we see greater genetic diversity in a particular population, we can
infer that the population is older – and this makes Africa the oldest
of all.
Source: Spencer Wells, The Journey of Man: A Genetic Odyssey, New
York: Random House, 2003, p. 39 – a most illuminating book in this
field.
 Read also Chris Scarre (ed.), The Human Past: World Prehistory and the
Development of Human Societies, London: Thames & Hudson, 2005, pp.
14–73; and Brian Fagan, World Prehistory: A Brief Introduction, New
York: Longman, 1999, pp. 62–88.
From Africa to Mehrgarh 35
Extract 2.2 Major crop types: native or foreign?
The controversy among botanists and plant agricultural specialists about
whether rice was a native Indian plant or was imported from China is
further fuelled by the evidence provided by the great American physiologist and biologist Jared Diamond, who says that all the main cereals
consumed by the Indians were first domesticated elsewhere. They include
wheat, barley, rice, sorghum and millet. Most probably, apart from rice,
these cereals arrived from the Fertile Crescent (Mesopotamia). Diamond
agrees that pulses such as hyacinth beans and black and green gram,
along with cucumber, cotton and flax, are Indian domesticates. In the
case of cotton, Diamond’s evidence confirms Jarrige’s conclusions about
the earliest cotton seeds being found at Mehrgarh. Diamond, however, is
quite categorical about the importance of the Fertile Crescent when he
writes that:
. . . even for those crops whose wild ancestor does occur outside of
Southwest Asia, we can be confident that the crops of Europe and
India were mostly obtained from Southwest Asia and were not local
domesticates.

The Harappan Civilisation, also known as the Indus Civilisation, was the
culmination of a long and sustained cultural evolution that took place in the
plains, valleys, and surrounding regions of a mighty river in the northwest of
India: the Indus. This river, with its many tributaries, is still the lifeline of
Punjab and Sind – being the basis of their agricultural prosperity; but its
importance in world history cannot be overstated. Just as three of the world’s
oldest civilisations grew along the banks of their great rivers – the Egyptian on
the Nile, the Mesopotamian on the Tigris–Euphrates, and the Chinese on the
Yangtse – similarly, along the banks of the Indus developed the first major
civilisation of the Indian sub-continent. Substantial human settlements also
existed along the banks of other nearby rivers, the now dried up Ghaggar–
Hakra, the Saraswati and the Drasadvati. Our evidence of these settlements is
drawn from the earliest of the Old Indian Vedic literature and from the various
modern geological and archaeological surveys.1
 The area covered by the culture
and tradition based on the Indus and other rivers was vast, embracing
practically the whole of modern Pakistan and northwest India, along with
modern Gujarat (see Map 3.1). The mature phase of the Harappan Civilisation,
the specifically urban phase, lasted between about 2600 and 1900, bc but, as
noted in Chapter 2, the antecedent of this phase, the Early Harappan, was in
the making at least a thousand years before 2600 bc. Indeed, the very first
roots of this civilisation go back even farther, to 7000 bc, the earliest date
assigned to the findings at Mehrgarh. Although the great cities had markedly
declined by 1900 bc, the cultural influence of this civilisation continued for
another few centuries after that date.
From the hindsight of history one would like to think that the legacy of this
civilisation would have been acknowledged, remembered and cherished by at
least the thinking and literate section of the Indian population during the
subsequent four millennia. Unfortunately, apart from the sparse clues that one
may seek in the early Vedic texts, no one seemed to have remembered, or cared
to remember, anything about the culture or achievements of the Harappans
until the twentieth century. The change came only after the groundbreaking
discoveries of the ruins at Mohenjo Daro (see Figure 3.1) and Harappa in the
1920s. Historians then radically revised their interpretation of early Indian
The Harappan Civilisation 39
history in two stages. During the first stage, in the 1920s and the 1930s, they
acknowledged that the history of India was much older than they had expected.
The belief that Indian civilisation started with the Aryans sometime around
1500 bc had to be discarded, and the new consensus was that it went back to at
least 3000 bc. Although historians confirmed the revised chronology, there
was nevertheless a certain amount of doubt nurtured concerning the origins of
the Harappan Civilisation, and some wondered whether it was an imported
model from Mesopotamia.2
 These doubts were put to rest by research from the
1970s.3
 As noted in Chapter 2, this research has clearly indicated that the roots
of the Harappan Civilisation go back to the Neolithic villages of Baluchistan,
Map 3.1 Mature Harappan sites and post-Harappan zones.
Key
200 miles
300 km
Ganwerivala
Mohenjo
Daro
Kot Diji
Balakot Chanhu Daro
Lothal
Dholavira
CHOLISTANBAHAWALPUR
ZONE
3
2
1
4
5
1 = Ochre-coloured pottery
 culture of the Ganga Plain
2 = Jhukar Culture in Sind
3 = Cemetery H culture in Punjab
4 = Banas culture in Mewar
5 = Malwa culture in Madhya Pradesh
Post-Harappan zones
BALUCHISTAN
GUJARAT
Rakhigari
GANGA-YAMUNA DOAB
Harappa
Kalibangan
Amri
Rangpur
Surkotada
Nageshwar
40 The Harappan Civilisation
as at Mehrgarh, and there is no evidence of the Mesopotamian or any other
foreign influence at least in the shaping of the mature phase of this civilisation.
This did not, however, imply that the Harappan Civilisation was built on
Vedic culture – actually the next phase in Indian history – as some modern
revisionists are keen to claim4
 (see Extract 3.1). Although some of the features
of the Harappan Culture can be detected within Vedic Culture,5
 there can be
little doubt that the former was essentially pre-Vedic and non-Vedic, but
indigenous, as the pioneer-explorer Sir John Marshall affirmed.6
 Chapter 4
takes up this discussion further.
Phases of progress in Harappan archaeology
The story of Harappan archaeology, although perhaps not as romantic or
nostalgic as those of Egypt and Mesopotamia, is a remarkable story of scholarly
and persevering endeavour in the task of uncovering the forgotten past. A
large number of sites, of varying extent, have been excavated in the geographical
and cultural zone of the northwest of the sub-continent. The excavations and
the unearthing of some astonishing finds have taken place in three major
phases, and each phase is distinguished by the remarkable work of one or more
archaeologists at one or more specific sites.
The first phase covered the nineteenth century.7
 The earliest pioneer was
Charles Masson, whose real name was James Lewis. He was actually an English
soldier who deserted from the East India Company’s army. In his new guise he
Figure 3.1 Mohenjo Daro perspective (by permission of RHPL).
The Harappan Civilisation 41
travelled in the 1820s to the Punjab, where he first encountered the remains of
Harappa. He described the site as a ‘ruinous brick castle’8
 with high walls and
towers, and noticed a large number of fine and standard-size bricks there. He
was followed, some years later, by Lieutenant Alexander Burns who, while
making a historic journey up the River Indus, also visited Harappa. Burns
described its ruins as extensive and calculated that the place was 3 miles in
circumference. He too noted that there were a large number of bricks, but that
there was not an entire building standing. Earlier on his journey he had also
visited an Indus site called Amri, which was to provide crucial evidence for
future archaeologists. When the findings of Masson and Burns came to the
attention of Sir Alexander Cunningham, the first director general of the
Archaeological Survey of India, he decided to visit Harappa himself. He made
three expeditions, two in the 1850s and a third in 1873. During the first two
visits he could corroborate the evidence of Masson and Burns, but during the
1873 visit he was much disappointed to witness the depletion of huge quantities of bricks. This was because the British engineers who were building the
railway line between Lahore and Multan had been utilising the bricks as ballast
under the tracks. Cunningham decided to conduct an archaeological survey of
Harappa before all the bricks disappeared. One of the first objects that he
discovered was a seal made of unpolished but smooth black stone, on which
was deeply engraved a bull, without hump, with two stars under the neck,
along with an inscription in six characters. This seal, which is now in the
British Museum, is the first of hundreds that are inextricably associated with
the Harappan Culture.9
The second phase began with the appointment in 1902 of a young and
brilliant archaeologist, John Marshall, as the new director general of the
Archaeological Survey of India.10 Marshall owed his appointment to Lord
Curzon, the viceroy, who aimed to keep India in subjugation to the British
crown, but who also greatly loved and admired her historical monuments and
wished to restore them to their ancient glory. He helped Marshall to make his
mark by authorising extra funding for the Archaeological Survey. Marshall’s
interest in Harappa and other similar sites had been aroused not only by the
work of Cunningham but also by that of an Italian scholar, Luigi Pio Tessitori,
who had written about a place called Kalibangan.11 Marshall ordered a systematic excavation of Harappa in 1914, but the onset of the First World War
delayed it. It was only in 1920 that one of his deputies, Dahya Ram Sahni,
embarked on it. His work continued until 1925. The results were not encouraging, as there had been much plundering by the railroad authorities, but
Sahni found three more seals with further curious pictographic legends.
The first man to see and write about the other prime site, Mohenjo Daro,
was D.R. Bhandarkar. After his visit there in 1911 he wrote the following
words, something that he must have long regretted afterwards: ‘According to
the local tradition, these are the ruins of a town only 200 years old . . . This
seems to be not incorrect, because the bricks here found . . . are of the modern
type, and there is a total lack of terra-cottas amidst the whole ruins.’12
42 The Harappan Civilisation
Fortunately, his pessimistic assessment of the finds at Mohenjo Daro was not
universally accepted; and in 1919 R.D. Banerji began excavating there. He
came to the conclusion that the site was very ancient and that it would yield
many treasures. To start with, he came across three soapstone seals, similar to
those found at Harappa. When both the Harappa and Mohenjo Daro seals and
other materials were compared, Marshall and his deputies, Sahni and Banerji,
became increasingly certain that the two cities were sites from a common
historical civilisation that flourished nearly 4,500 years ago. From 1925 to
1927 Marshall, in collaboration with a team of brilliant Indian deputies, such
as M.S. Vats and K.N. Dikshit, worked indefatigably with hundreds of
labourers on the Mohenjo Daro site. The results of his efforts were astonishing
and stupendous.13 The interpretations of his findings were to have a monumental impact upon the study of Indian history. It has been said that Marshall
‘left India two thousand years older than he found it’; and a distinguished
archaeologist, Robin Coningham, thinks that ‘Marshall’s museums and
newspaper coverage of the Indus Civilisation played an important part in the
road to self-determination – it provided a civilised backdrop’.14 New excavations continued during the 1930s. At one particular settlement, Chanhu Daro,
east of the Indus, an American team led by Norman Brown was given permission to dig and to be able to send some of the artefacts to their sponsor, the
Museum of Fine Arts at Boston.15 Another great archaeologist, Sir Aurel Stein,
toured around the region of the dried-up Ghaggar–Hakra river system and
listed nearly sixty different sites.16 The 1930s were the years of economic
depression, with little funding available for the archaeologists. The effects of
this on the training of new staff and many other administrative problems were
investigated by the world-renowned Sir Leonard Woolley, on the orders of the
viceroy, Lord Linlithgow; but the Woolley Report of 1939 was savagely
attacked, particularly by the Indian archaeologists, for adopting an unduly
negative tone.
The third major phase opened in 1944 with the appointment of Mortimer
Wheeler as director general of the Archaeological Survey17 (see Extract 3.2).
Wheeler brought new methods of controlled stratigraphic excavation and
recording – methods which are still used today. He trained a whole new generation of South Asian archaeologists in his methods and expounded new theories
about the demise of the Harappan Culture. Some of his theories are now
rejected, but there can be no doubt that he brought new skills to the
archaeological projects of the Indus basin and prepared the groundwork for
post-independence Indian and Pakistani archaeologists. Wheeler became an
adviser after partition, and both Indian and Pakistani archaeologists broke new
ground in the region. Fresh discoveries are continually being reported, such as
the one about a 3,500-year-old stone axe engraved with the Harappan script
being recently found in Tamil Nadu, indicating a much broader span of
Harappan influence in the sub-continent and a closer historical link between
the regions of India.18 A world-class Museum and Centre of Study for Indus
Civilisation has also been established at the University of Vadodara in India.
The Harappan Civilisation 43
These developments will offer new insights into the various phases of the
Harappan Culture and Civilisation. The most critical excavation of the postwar period took place at Mehrgarh in Baluchistan in 1974–5, under the supervision of Jean-François Jarrige, who led a joint Franco-Pakistani team.19 It was
the work of this team that demonstrated the thread of archaeological continuity
from the earliest foundations of Mehrgarh in the seventh millennium bc to the
great cities of the Indus.
Understanding the Mature Harappan phase
The mature phase is essentially the high urban phase. The rich material evidence dug out from the ground by dedicated teams of specialists and labourers
and systematically studied and interpreted by the above-mentioned names
helps us to reconstruct this urban civilisation and gain an insight into the lives
and customs of the Harappans. The evidence from the mature period covers a
time-span of some 700 years, but at any particular site one may discover finds
from different epochs. The finds are fascinating in themselves, and each has to
be examined in a particular way. Some can speak for themselves, for example
the brick walls or children’s toys. There is little argument as to their purpose.
Other finds need to be interpreted for their especial significance, such as a
piece of sculpture, a terracotta seal or a recognisable seal motif. These on their
own do not describe themselves, but may provide valuable clues to understanding the art, trade and religion of the Harappans. There are also finds
which tell us nothing, such as the Harappan script or the peculiarly shaped
figurines and strange animals on seals: it is very difficult to investigate them.
The problem of the script is particularly frustrating, because our understanding
of the Harappans would be so much more enhanced if it could be deciphered.
Despite these difficulties, there is sufficient material evidence for us to discuss
the characteristics of the mature urban phase of the Harappan Civilisation.
The extent and hierarchy of settlements
Numerous Harappan settlements have been identified in Sind, Baluchistan,
the Cholistan desert in the Bahawalpur district of Pakistan, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat and the upper areas of the Ganga–Yamuna doab, the land between
the two rivers. A similar settlement has also been found at Shortughai, near the
river Oxus, in north Afghanistan.20 Owing to the variability of their size and
importance, a four-tier hierarchy of settlement forms has been proposed.21 The
first tier consists of five very large sites, at Harappa (west Punjab), Mohenjo
Daro (Sind), Dholavira (Gujarat), Rakhigari (Haryana) and Ganveriwala
(Bahawalpur). Three of these sites each cover an area of 100 hectares, or 250
acres, while each of the other two is 80 hectares, or 200 acres. The discoveries
at Harappa and Mohenjo Daro have been like benchmarks against which the
relative urbanism of other sites can be judged. The second tier consists of
thirty-two sites, each of which has an area of about 20 hectares, or 50 acres.
44 The Harappan Civilisation
Although smaller in size, they have walled enclosures and other architectural
features similar to the first-tier sites. The two prominent sites in this tier are
Kalibangan (Haryana) and Lothal (Gujarat). A third tier of settlements, more
numerous than those of the second, consists of such sites as Surkotada and
Kuntasi (both in Gujarat), which cover on average 3 hectares, or 7.5 acres.
Aspects of these sites, such as fortifications and their ceramics, provide evidence
of a distinct Mature Harappan style. The fourth and lowest tier consists of
nearly 15,000 settlements, each covering about 1 hectare, or 2.5 acres. These
were either villages or centres for specialised crafts. Balakot (Sind) and
Nageshwar (Gujarat) are typical sites. Whether collectively all the settlements
were part of an empire, perhaps run from large sites such as Harappa or Mohenjo
Daro, is a question that has preoccupied historians and archaeologists alike.
Rather than thinking in terms of an empire, we should imagine a particular
pattern of culture and a certain type of organisation that covered a very large
area. In the absence of substantial archaeological evidence of a central political
authority, one can only conclude that there was a great deal of cultural but not
political uniformity.22
Civic planning and great structures
Even before any digging had begun at the two cities of Harappa and Mohenjo
Daro, the first archaeologists were already being introduced to the urban
splendours of the Indus people through the hundreds and thousands of bricks
that they saw stacked or scattered about on the ground. While the brick stocks
of Harappa were much depleted owing to railway depredation, those in
Mohenjo Daro were massive.23 There were many mud bricks that belonged to
the period before the middle of the third millennium bc, but the ones that
truly fascinated the archaeologists were those from about 2600 bc onwards.
They were bricks baked in kilns fired with charcoal from the wood of the dense
forests which, at that time, must have been plentiful throughout the Indus
valley. These perfectly shaped baked kiln bricks were all of a standard size,
measuring 7 x 14 x 28 cm, with the ratio of thickness to width and to length
being 1 : 2 : 4. After the top layers of debris and overgrowth had been cleared,
what emerged at Mohenjo Daro, particularly, was nothing short of spectacular.24
There appeared, from below, the ruins of an entire city, extremely well planned
and divided into sectors or mounds. In the west there was a high citadel mound
with strong fortifications, and in the east was the lower city with smaller
mounds. On the citadel mound there were the ruins of two or three large
public buildings, of which the Great Bath is the best known today (see Extract
3.3). Another building looks like a granary, although archaeologists are not
entirely sure; and a third building could possibly be a great hall. In the lower
city, the streets were arranged in grid patterns, with major north–south and
east–west streets intersecting each other, while numerous smaller streets and
alleyways criss-crossed them. In between them were constructed blocks of
houses, none of which opened onto the main streets. A feature of houses, public
The Harappan Civilisation 45
buildings and streets that fascinates the modern observer or tourist was a
system of clean water supply to the inhabitants, along with latrine facilities by
which the waste was channelled off without coming into contact with clean
water.25 Each house had its own well, and one authority has calculated that
there were nearly 700 wells in the city.26 These, along with the cisterns and
reservoirs, would have ensured that the citizenry had sufficient water for
drinking, cooking, bathing and cleaning. Today, millions of people in povertystricken Third World cities suffer from an acute shortage of water, with
disastrous consequences for their quality of life; the people of Mohenjo Daro
did not encounter this problem 4,500 years ago. The skills of their engineers
and plumbers in laying out separate inflows and drains under the streets and
buildings deserve admiration.
What has been discovered at Mohenjo Daro is also noticed at other major
sites. With a few exceptions, most of these sites possess a raised citadel sector
in the west and a lower town in the east, burnt-brick or mud-brick houses, a
drainage system and fairly straight wide streets intersecting narrow lanes. One
particular structure of Mohenjo Daro, however, was unique to that city: it is
not found elsewhere and, moreover, there is nothing like it in the entire ancient
world – the Great Bath. However, in other Harappan settlements we do sometimes notice other architectural features. Harappa, for example, does not have a
citadel mound, but has a unique set of circular brick platforms, supposedly for
threshing grain.27 The remains at Lothal reveal an artificial platform with
streets and houses along with, arguably, either a unique brick dockyard connected by a channel leading to the Gulf of Cambay,28 or a bath or a fresh water
reservoir. One of the most interesting sites, Dholavira, contained three sectors:
the castle and bailey sector, the middle sector and the lower town.29 It was
built of stone, not brick. The citadel there uniquely contained features such as
gateways, stairs, corridors, ceremonial routes and guard chambers, none of
which has been found at Mohenjo Daro or Harappa. Large reservoirs of water
were also integrated into the civic planning at Dholavira.30
Food security, occupations and trading systems
The absence of evidence indicating a unified empire or city-states in the
Harappan system does not imply an absence of organisation. The complex
civic planning of the settlements of the first three tiers and the standard of
living of the people, superior by far to the semi-rural level of the Early Harappan
phase, suggest to us a high degree of competency in management and
administration by those in authority. The western citadel area was, generally
speaking, the headquarters of the elite, although large public buildings have
been identified in different parts of the metropolitan cities.31 All major civic
affairs were probably organised from there. The paramount concern of those in
charge of the large settlements was to ensure a continuous food supply for the
inhabitants; this was less than difficult because the larger sites were in proximity to varied geographical zones with rich farming plains, river and coastal
46 The Harappan Civilisation
fisheries, grazing lands for domestic animals, and dense forests.32 Sufficient
food was brought into the cities by farmers, who sold them to the state officials
overseeing the great granaries. The seeds of wheat, barley, peas, melons, sesame
and mustard have all been found,33 with a number of them dated. There is
disagreement among the archaeologists as to the identification of the actual
granaries,34 but there can be no doubt that storage depots and food warehouses
existed. There is a high probability that there were granaries at both Mohenjo
Daro and Harappa, although the two structures were built on different plans.
Standardised weights and measures, in graduated sizes and calculated by
decimal increments, were used in commercial exchanges between the farmers
and the granary officials.35 There were also stringent trading regulations.36
Animal husbandry was an important aspect of farming, with the faunal bone
remains and terracotta animal images indicating the Harappan familiarity
with varied types of domesticated and wild animals.37 We are unsure of the
proportion of the meat-consuming classes.38
From the number of artefacts and finds available, we must visualise Mohenjo
Daro and other large centres to be very busy settlements. A variety of craftsmen,
traders and workmen were occupied everywhere, particularly in the lower city.
The most important crafts were in the fields of textiles, ceramic manufacturing,
stone carving, household artefacts such as razors, bowls, cups, vases and
spindles, and the production of jewellery, statuettes, figurines and children’s
toys, some of which were mechanical in function. This last category of goods is
perhaps the most reliable evidence of the sophistication of this society.39 The
processes employed in the making of these articles demonstrate the best of the
Indus valley technology. The Harappans knew how to manufacture bronze by
mixing copper and tin, but both metals were difficult to obtain; so, although
the Harappans were the first Bronze Age people of Indian history, there are few
remains of bronze tools.40 Gold and silver were widely used in the manufacture
of pendants, armlets, beads and other decorative ornaments.41 Brick manufacture and masonry engaged many workers, and a large number of artisans were
engaged in the potter’s trade.42 Most Harappan pottery was wheel-turned and
produced in large quantities. The most captivating of the smaller material
finds from the ruins of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa are the nearly 2,000
inscribed steatite or soapstone seals, which indicate that the making of seals
and seal-cutting were extremely important occupations; a specialised class of
people were engaged in their production.43 All traders had their stalls full of
consumer goods related to the various crafts; food and drinks were sold by both
farmers and city people. Unskilled labourers would have worked in street
cleaning, garbage collecting,44 well-digging, masonry and transporting people
in ox-drawn wagons.45 Compared with the cities of mediaeval Europe or
modern India, Harappa and Mohenjo Daro were much cleaner. There were also
entertainers, musicians, drummers and jugglers, who would have provided
recreation for the leisured citizens.46
The craft and manufacturing activities in the settlements depended for their
prosperity on the internal and external trade networks.47 Raw materials from
The Harappan Civilisation 47
across the region were imported by the middlemen who employed craftsmen
and skilled workers to manufacture the finished products to satisfy the consumer market. Certain places, particularly ports such as Lothal, acted as entrepôts
or warehouse depots.48 Copper ore was imported from a number of sites for
making sharp-edged bronze saws that could efficiently cut through hard shells,
collected from a number of coastal sites and passed on to the jewellers who
fashioned bracelets and bangles from them.49 Precious stones were used for
making ornaments and utensils. Agate and jasper, the hard stones imported
from Kutch and Gujarat, were much valued as they long retained their brightness and polish. The softer varieties, such as turquoise, lapis lazuli or carnelian,
were used in the manufacture of assortments of much prized beads50 (see Figure
3.2). Raw materials such as stones, marine shells and precious metals were
bulk-transported across land by bullocks and buffalo-drawn carts and, on the
River Indus and its tributaries, and between coastal ports, by boats, sometimes
depicted on the Harappan seals.51 Although the Indus economic zone is
generally self-sufficient, its people have throughout history been enterprising
traders who pioneered commercial links with foreign countries. We have
evidence of such links made during the Mature Harappan phase. The countries
involved were Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Iran, Mesopotamia and Oman. The
only Mature Harappan site outside the sub-continent was at Shortugai in
Afghanistan, and it has been argued that its position as a transit point for many
routes in that region encouraged a settlement of Indus traders engaged in the
exchange of goods. They sought tin and lapis lazuli in return for the Indus products such as textiles, combs, beads, dice, etc.52 Objects from the Indus region
Figure 3.2 A necklace of Harappan beads (Pat Baker: line drawing).
48 The Harappan Civilisation
have been found in both Turkmenistan and Iran, the latter country providing
the main land route to Mesopotamia.53 A flourishing sea trade linked the Indus
settlements with Oman and southern Mesopotamia.54 From Oman came
copper and shells primarily, and also dates, honey, incense and salt fish. The
exports to Oman included various foodstuffs, boats, livestock and utility artefacts. Beads, bangles, hard woods, pearls, ivory and numerous exotic animals
reached Mesopotamia by boat from the Indus region, and the Indus valley seals
have also been found there. A Mesopotamian text from the reign of King
Sargon of Akkad refers to boats bringing the cargo from a place called Meluhha,
now identified as the Indus valley; these boats probably sailed from the port of
Lothal on the Gujarat–Kathiawar coast.55 In the absence of reliable trade
figures it is difficult to find out whether the balance of trade worked in favour
of the Indus zone or the foreign countries. However, far more Indus valley
products have been retrieved in regions outside India than foreign products
within the Indus zone.56
Secular power and religion
It is difficult for archaeologists to obtain a picture of the elites who held power
in the cities of the Indus: most probably, there was a coalition of rich merchants,
priests and bureaucrats. While no palaces or rich tombs have been found, there
can be no doubt that, without someone exercising power in a systematic way,
Mohenjo Daro’s period of glory would have been much shorter than the
estimated 700 years during which the city flourished. A powerful piece of
sculpture, retrieved from Mohenjo Daro and now in the National Museum in
Karachi, is that of a personage who has been described as a priest-king. His
gravitas definitely conveys the impression of a person of influence and authority, of which, unfortunately, he is the sole representative. It has been
suggested that the power of the elite may be discerned from the images on
soapstone seals,57 which may symbolise political, economic or ecclesiastical
power. Apart from the script, the seals carry depictions of ten different animals:
these are the mythical unicorn, the zebu, elephant, rhinoceros, water buffalo,
short-horned humpless bull, goat, antelope, crocodile and hare (see Figure
3.3). It may even be that the animal images acted as symbols of authority of
certain officers or of dominant lineages and clan families.58 Since the unicorn
appears on the largest number of seals it might be the power symbol of the
most numerous clan.59 Rich merchants too might have used the seals as their
personal or official insignia for goods to be traded.60
It is unwise to conjecture as to the organised religion of the inhabitants of
the Indus cities. However, we can deduce certain aspects of their religiosity
and spirituality from some of the archaeological finds and from the living
traditions of India today. Some of them may even be linked to Hinduism itself.
The water in the Great Bath on the higher citadel of Mohenjo Daro was, most
probably, considered holy and was perhaps reserved for ritual washing by
groups of priests;61 and ritual washing has been one of the immemorial customs
The Harappan Civilisation 49
of Hindu India. Some interesting symbols of religious art, with close Hindu
associations, can be seen on seals and tablets. On some are found images of a
male with horned headdress seated in the Yoga posture of padmasana.
62 Yoga is
one of the great keys to understanding Hinduism. The pipal and the banyan
trees, very common trees of India used as symbols of fertility, protection and
death in Hindu mythology, are also depicted in the Indus script as well as on
ornaments.63 Other religious art symbols, also in common with the Hindu
tradition, include garlands, arches, bangles, figurines of fertility goddesses,
etc. In addition to religious and ritual art symbols, there are many abstract
symbols and geometric designs. The endless-knot, the swastika, the circle, the
ring – all have their motifs etched, engraved or carved into seals, pottery,
copper and ivory objects.64
Sculpture, script and mathematics
All the material evidence that we have referred to thus far – the ruins of the
great monuments, the standardised bricks and the terracotta seals, along with
a great variety of craft goods and tools – adds up to a considerable treasure;
but in its overall grandeur and magnificence the entire collection pales in
Figure 3.3 Harappan seals (Pat Baker: line drawings adapted from Possehl, op. cit.,
 pp. 50, 53, 80).
50 The Harappan Civilisation
comparison with, say, the treasures of ancient Egypt. This is even more noticeable when we compare the achievement of the two civilisations in the art of
sculpture. The Harappan heritage is indeed very undistinguished. A recent
scholarly publication has listed just eight major items of true Harappan
sculpture.65 The most well known of the eight are a solid figure of a robed
priest-king (only 17.8 cm high), mentioned earlier, and the figurine of the socalled Dancing Girl of Mohenjo Daro, in her graceful and elegant pose, quite
nude except for her bangles and a necklace (see Figure 3.4). What is interesting,
however, is that there is ‘a difference in conceptualisation, form and technique’66
between the two works. The first one is wonderfully crafted in stone and foreshadows the great stone art of India in the historic period. The Dancing Girl,
on the other hand, is a bronze product, made by the lost-wax process, and it too
provides a model for the later copper and bronze objects made in the subcontinent. The two examples, along with the fact that a Harappan motif has
been identified as the ‘inter-circling motif’ on the Bodhi stone of Bodh Gaya,
suggest to us a degree of Harappan precedence to the future sculptural tradition
in India.67
The Harappans possessed a script which they used for inscribing on a variety
of objects: soapstone or steatite seals, impressible materials such as clay or soft
metal, and objects such as stone or copper tablets, bracelets, marble, ivory,
shells and bangles. Nearly 4,200 inscribed objects have been recovered, with
Mohenjo Daro and Harappa accounting for some 85 per cent.68 The script
Figure 3.4 Dancing girl and priest-king (Pat Baker: line drawings adapted from
 Possehl, op. cit., p. 75 and plate 2:28).
The Harappan Civilisation 51
contains 419 signs, of which 113 occur once only, 47 twice, 59 fewer than five
times and 200 every so often.69 These signs are far too many to constitute an
alphabetic or syllabic script; they are mostly logo-syllabic characters. Only
eight texts longer than fifteen signs have been found.70 The average length of
an inscription is five signs, although the longest inscription is made up of
twenty-six signs. The script was written from right to left, but started from
the left when it carried on to the second line.71 Perhaps the most striking
Harappan inscription – containing nine signs, each 37 cm high and 25 to 27
cm broad, and each made by joining crystalline pieces and engraved on a
wooden board – has been found at Dholavira.72 Were it a signboard, it would
indicate a certain degree of literacy among the people. Writing is the key to
understanding the mind of a society; and history begins with the written word.
We should become more knowledgeable about the Harappans if we were able
to read their script or see some clear links between their script and the
innumerable scripts used in the sub-continent today. Three great scholars –
Professors Mahadevan of the Archaeological Survey of India, Asko Parpola of
the University of Helsinki and Walter Fairservis Jr. of Vassar College, New
York – spent years attempting to understand the mysteries of the script; but
they too have been unable to decipher it. Nor are we able to state definitively
whether their language belonged to the Indo-Aryan or the Dravidian family of
languages. In this sense, the Harappan Civilisation must, therefore, be classed
as pre-historic. The script remains undeciphered and cannot provide help,
despite assertions made to the contrary.73 If, however, a bilingual text, one using
the Harappan script against another, already understood, were to be found on a
single seal or some object, then the mystery might unravel, in the same way as
the decryption of the Rosetta Stone in Egypt, containing the same text in three
languages, solved the puzzle of the hieroglyphs. Most archaeologists, however,
seem to be in general agreement that, since the majority of inscriptions are
found on seals, and since the seals were an important symbol of authority or an
exchange mechanism in trade relations, it is likely that the script must have
something useful to say in terms of administration, trade or perhaps spirituality.
Up to the present, we can judge the Harappan Civilisation only from its
material remains.
While mathematical problems were inscribed on the Sumerian and other
Mesopotamian clay tablets, there is nothing similar to be found in the Indus
region. One should not conclude that the Harappans lacked mathematical
insights or knowledge. As with all aspects of this civilisation, the clues to
understanding lie in its ruins and artefacts. We have already referred to the
standard ratio of 1 : 2 : 4 in brick technology; and many skills of measuring and
computational techniques can be easily discerned from the architectural and
town-planning profiles. Weighing scales and instruments for measuring
length have also been found. Part of a shell recovered at Mohenjo Daro,
measuring 6.62 cm, or 2.6 in, is divided into nine equally spaced parallel lines
cut with a fine saw. One of these lines is marked by a circle, and the sixth line
from it by a dot. The distance between the circle and the dot has been calculated
52 The Harappan Civilisation
as 1.32 in, and is known as the Indus inch.74 As this Indus inch is equal to two
Sumerian equivalent measures called shushi, we may rightly conclude on the
exchange of computational or commercial information between the Harappans
and the Mesopotamians.75 Two other measuring scales, with very finely
graduated divisions, have also been discovered at Lothal and Harappa.76 All
three scales indicate a certain uniformity in establishing ratios and in modes of
division and measurement. In addition the Harappans possessed a highly
standardised system of cubical stone weights. A red seed, called ‘gunja’, equivalent to two grains of barley, constituted the base weight, and three different
series of stone weight ratios have been calculated. The first series of seven
weights doubled in size from 1 : 2 : 4 : 8 : 16 : 32 : 64, while in the second and
third series of weights we find a ratio of 160, 320 and 640, and then moving
up from 1,600, 3,200, 6,400 to 12,800. The average ‘gunja’ seed weighed
0.109 grams; and the largest weight found at Mohenjo Daro, weigh ing 10,865
gm, or 25 lb, is nearly 100,000 times the weight of the ‘gunja’ seed.77 From
the various weight details gained from such tools as the plumb-line balls used
by masons, mathematicians have constructed frequency charts which show
that the weights were fractions or multiples of a standard weight known
as uncia. This weight was 27.2 gm, and weights on the multiples of 5 uncia
(136 gm) or one-sixteenth uncia (1.7 gm) have been found, once again
suggesting a decimal system of calculation.78 Finally, we must acknowledge
that the Harappan farmers, like their Egyptian and Mesopotamian peers, must
have relied upon their practical mathematical knowledge and intuition in
order to control the flood cycles of their great river with sluices and irrigation
channels, and to maximise crop yields by systematic sequencing of sowing and
harvesting of spring wheat and barley and autumn crops such as cotton and
sesame.79
The eclipse of the Harappan Civilisation
A decline set in around 1900 bc in the dynamics of the Harappan system, and
there is little doubt that after 1700 bc little remained of the Harappan Civilisation. It did not, however, come to an abrupt end within a particular period
of decades or during a particular century. Until quite recently it was believed
that the Indus cities were destroyed by the Aryans who entered India from Iran
and Afghanistan through northwestern passes such as the Bolan and the
Khyber. This theory was based on two sets of evidence. One was the reference
in the Rig-Veda, the premier Vedic text, that the Aryan god Indra destroyed a
hostile people called the Dasas or Dasyus who lived in fortified places called
pur.
80 The other concerned the discovery of some skeletons of men, women and
children from the lower city of Mohenjo Daro, killed during the so-called last
massacre.81 The archaeologist who was most vehement in putting forward this
theory of an Aryan onslaught on the Indus cities was Sir Mortimer Wheeler
who, after admittedly considering and rejecting other theories, had no doubt
that ‘on circumstantial evidence, Indra stands accused’.82 Wheeler later
The Harappan Civilisation 53
admitted the validity of other reasons for the Harappan decline, but nevertheless
stuck to his claim about the massacre.83 Most literary scholars and archaeologists
today dismiss Wheeler’s theory as too simplistic.84 For example, the Rig-Vedic
pur was nothing like an Indus city; it was just a structure of flimsy ramparts
and stockades.85 If the purs that Indra is supposed to have destroyed were the
Indus cities, it is most curious that the first great sacred text of Hinduism, the
Rig-Veda, does not mention anything about such recognisable features of
the Harappan cities as the well-laid-out streets, houses, wells, drains, granaries
and seals. Again, the skeletons of some people in the lower city of Mohenjo
Daro are considered a wholly insufficient evidence of an attack on such a large
system of authority and government as represented by the Indus Civilisation.
The Aryan invasion theory will be discussed further in Chapter 4.
Scholars now consider a combination of natural and socio-economic factors
to be the most likely reason for the decline of the Indus cities. Two of the
natural factors could be the geological and the climatic.86 It is presumed that
the Indus region experienced severe tectonic disturbances brought about by
earthquakes at the beginning of the second millennium bc.
87 These upheavals
not only affected the normal course of the Indus and its tributaries but also
helped dry up the nearby Ghaggar–Hakra river. Modern satellite imagery
confirms the theory that the dramatic shifts in the river courses might have
created great floods that could have cut off the food-producing areas from the
cities themselves.88 The quantities of silt layers in the upper levels of Mohenjo
Daro, which are today many feet above the river course, are also a witness to
those floods. Without the surrounding food-producing areas the cities themselves could have been left isolated. And with the frequent uncertainty of
regular food supplies, the city populace prudently decided to migrate before
starvation overtook them. Research into the history of rainfall patterns brings
out the climatic factor of the decline. During the Mature Harappan period,
about 2500 bc, there was a great rise in the amount of rainfall, but by the
beginning of the second millennium bc it had dropped markedly.89 This too
would have had a damaging effect on food production, further resulting in
depopulation of the cities. One of the reasons for the rainfall’s unpredictability
was the extreme deforestation and loss of trees caused by the burning of charcoal
in brick-baking kilns. With the rivers shifting their courses, the rainfall
declining and sufficient food failing to arrive from the countryside, we have to
recognise a slow but inevitable collapse of the Indus system.90 This collapse, it
should be re-emphasised, cannot be explained by any one particular cause; we
must think in terms of a ‘combination of factors’.91 The final outcome was
catastrophic for the Mature Harappan phase. The Indus cities no longer had
surplus produce for trade, and the ensuing loss of revenue would have affected
all classes of people. The city authorities became powerless to prevent civil
unrest or brigandage, and groups of people were continually leaving the cities
for their own safety and survival. As the cities became poorer, their services
declined dramatically. The drains and sewers of Mohenjo Daro, kept in good
and clean working order for centuries, clogged up with waste and excreta,
54 The Harappan Civilisation
resulting in disease and pestilence. By about 1700 bc the desolated Mohenjo
Daro had become a ghost town. Thirty-seven centuries would pass before its
former grandeur was revealed to a world hitherto ignorant of it.
Civilisations continually rise and fall, but they rarely disappear without
trace. It became so with the Harappan Civilisation. The collapse of the Indus
system was really a collapse of its urban features.92 Its culture did not cease to
exist wholesale. The sophisticated lifestyle of the Indus people had certainly
ended, but their folk culture continued at the village level.93 Several of the
beliefs and rituals, and the simple crafts and skills for making various utensils
and artefacts, along with many rural features, survived and developed into
proto-historic cultures in the surrounding regions.94 The two important
migrations of people, caused particularly by the accelerated drying up of the
Ghaggar–Hakra river during the later phase, were in the direction of the
Ganga–Yamuna doab and Gujarat, leading towards the Deccan.95 Apart from
these two big inter-regional movements, local migrations from the urban
settlements into the rural areas similarly occurred. Archaeologically speaking,
the cultures that resulted were relatively quite advanced, in the sense that they
evolved as part of the Chalcolithic/Bronze Age, and did not regress to the skills
level of the Stone Age. Different names have been assigned to these lesser
regional cultures, such as the Ochre-Coloured Pottery Culture in the Ganges
plain,96 the Jhukar Culture in Sind,97 the Cemetery H Culture in the Punjab,98
the Banas Culture in Mewar in Rajasthan99 or the Malwa Culture of Madhya
Pradesh.100 Historians identify these cultures on the basis of their pottery
styles, grave goods and burial patterns and the quality of ornaments and tools,
particularly those of copper. Some of these cultures survived for many centuries,
thus continuing many of the non-urban Harappan traditions. The peoples of
these cultures, in course of time, came into contact with other nomadic foreign
groups, such as the Aryans, some of whom began to enter India from 1700 bc
onwards; and a new Indo-Aryan civilisation would come to shape India’s
history for the next thousand years and more. Even today, however, a historically
conscious traveller, making a journey of exploration in Punjab, Sind and
Baluchistan, will certainly notice the imprints of the glorious Harappan past.
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 3.1 The claim of the Indus Civilisation being a Vedic
 Civilisation
This claim is made by some Indian historians essentially on the basis of
the Puranas (see Chapter 8) being accepted as a credible source of Indian
chronology. The Puranas provide long lists of ancient dynasties, and
the so-called Uttanapada Dynasty of Manu Swayambhuba of the tenth
millennium bc is considered as the first of the dynasties that continue for
The Harappan Civilisation 55
thousands of years. The Puranas are certainly a valuable source of general
knowledge for the historians but, as there is no archaeological or any
other type of evidence for claiming a continuity of Indian kingship from
such an early period, we need to treat it with scepticism. The claim is
also based on the false belief that no waves of migrants entered India after
the tenth millennium bc. Despite its intellectual weaknesses, this claim
has much resonance among a large number of Hindu religious nationalists
imbued with the idea of Hindutva. The following passage gives a flavour
of this revisionist version of history.
The Indus Civilisation was essentially a Vedic Civilisation . . . That
since in India there was a continuity of Kingship from Manu onwards
to Candragupta there could have been no ‘Aryan’ invasion or
migration, at least unknown to the closest neighbours, the Persians.
Since the majority of the people of this part of the world belonged to
the eastern branch of the Mediterranean race from about the 9th or
10th millennium bc, the people of the Indus cities also belonged to
the same race, as also the Vedic Indians and, consequently, there can
be no question of ‘pre-Aryan’ or ‘non-Aryan’ orientation of this civilisation. The Indus people belonged to one of the Vedic tribes or ‘Janas’
and were essentially Indian with Vedic culture. In the circumstances,
there could have been no invasion ‘Aryans’ or ‘Indo-Europeans’ into
India as professed by occidental orientalists. Hence the Indic
Civilisation was Rig-Vedic Civilisation.
Source: A.N. Chandra, The Rig-Vedic Culture and the Indus Civilisation,
Calcutta: Ratna Prakashan, 1980, p. 218.
Extract 3.2 Mortimer Wheeler as director general of the
 Archaeological Survey of India
Sir Mortimer Wheeler was one of the greatest archaeologists of the
twentieth century. His energy and dedication to work were legendary.
As soon as his ship arrived at Bombay in 1944 he took a train to Delhi
and then to Simla, where his headquarters were established. The
efficiency that he generated among his staff can serve as an example to
the many complacent officials and bureaucrats who today man the government departments in India. In the following passage he recalls his first
day at work.
On the top floor of the gaunt Railway Board building where the
Archaeological Survey was then housed at Simla, I stepped over the
recumbent forms of peons, past office windows revealing little clusters
of idle clerks and hangers-on, to the office which I had taken over
that morning . . . As I opened my door I turned and looked back. The
56 The Harappan Civilisation
sleepers had not stirred, and only a wavering murmur like the distant
drone of bees indicated the presence of drowsy human organisms
within. I emitted a bull-like roar, and the place leapt to anxious life
. . . One after another my headquarters staff was ushered in, and within
an hour the purge was complete. Bowed shoulders and apprehensive
glances showed an office working as it had not worked for many a long
day. That evening one of the peons (who later became my most admirable Headquarters Jemadar) said tremulously to my deputy’s Irish
wife, ‘Oh, memsahib, a terrible thing has happened to us this day.’
Source: Sir Mortimer Wheeler, Still Digging, New York: E.P. Dutton,
1955, p. 186.
Extract 3.3 The Great Bath at Mohenjo Daro
The Great Bath at Mohenjo Daro is a monumental structure that came to
be revealed to the world through the excavations carried out under Sir
John Marshall. The following extract provides clear evidence of the
excellence of the architecture of the Great Bath, and it is also a good
example of Marshall’s precision in his description of this wondrous
treasure of the ancient world.
The Great Bath . . . was part of what appears to have been a vast
hydropathic establishment and the most imposing of all the remains
unearthed at Mohenjo Daro. Its plan is simple: in the centre, an open
quadrangle with verandahs on its four sides, and at the back of three of
the verandahs various galleries and rooms; on the south, a long gallery
with a small chamber in each corner; on the east, a single range of
small chambers, including one with a well; on the north, a group of
several halls and fair-sized rooms. In the midst of the open quadrangle
is a large swimming bath, some 39 feet long by 23 feet broad and
sunk about 8 feet below the paving of the court, with a flight of steps
at either end, and at the foot of each a low platform for the convenience
of bathers, who might otherwise have found the water too deep. The
bath was filled from the well in Chamber 16 and possibly from other
wells besides, and the waste water was carried off through a covered
drain near the S.W. corner, the corbelled roof of which is some 6 ft 6
in. in height . . . for careful and massive construction the Great Bath
could hardly have been improved upon. From N. to S. its overall
measurement is 180 ft, from E. to W. 108 ft. The outer walls were
between 7 and 8 ft in thickness at the base, with a batter on the outside
of about 6 ft; the inner walls for the most part about half as much . . .
the actual lining of the tank was made of finely dressed brick laid in
gypsum mortar, between 3 and 4 ft in thickness. Backing this was an
inch thick damp-proof course of bitumen, which was kept in place
The Harappan Civilisation 57
and prevented from creeping by another thin wall of burnt brick
behind it. Then came a packing of crude brick and behind this again
another solid rectangle of burnt brick encompassing the whole, with
short cross-walls between it and the verandah foundations in order to
counteract any outward pressure . . . .
A more effective method of construction with the materials then
available would hardly have been possible, and how well it has stood
the test of time is sufficiently apparent from the present state of the
tank which, after 5000 years, is still astonishingly well preserved.

The 6,000 or so languages spoken in the world today are classified by scholars
into major language family groups. The dominant language family of the
northern part of the Indian sub-continent is the Indo-Aryan. This family is
also considered to have a sister branch in the Iranian family; and both branches
are said to belong to a much larger family of families, which is known as IndoEuropean.1
 The longest established language of this entire family is Sanskrit;
and it is from the progressive evolution of Sanskrit, over many millennia, that
the other present-day Indo-Aryan languages of India developed.
Apart from being a modern-day label for a family of languages, the term
‘Indo-Aryan’ can serve to describe the evolution of Indian culture, over more
than 1,000 years, following the demise of the Harappan Civilisation. Groups
of nomadic tribal people from eastern and southern Afghanistan started
migrating to the Indian sub-continent around 1700 bc; and their movement
gained momentum with the arrival, about 1400 bc, of a particular group
which called itself Arya, or noble. We sometimes call them the Rig-Vedic
Aryans, because they brought with them the earliest portion of a collection of
hymns, known as the Rig-Veda, which was composed by their bards and seers
in a very early form of Sanskrit or Old Indic.2
 Other tribal groups of that
period, who did not call themselves Arya, also tend to be included by historians
under the generic label of Aryans.3
 In the new society that was born out of the
mix of the pre-Aryan and Aryan cultural elements, the Rig-Vedic Aryans
increasingly came to occupy a central position. The Indo-Aryan culture that
eventually emerged, more commonly known as the Vedic Culture, is still with
us in India, forming the essential core of Hindu religion and society. The word
‘Vedic’ is the adjective of the noun ‘Veda’, which refers to the Rig-Veda and
other collections of sacred hymns and chants.
This chapter will examine different aspects of the Indo-Aryan society and its
culture; but before we do that we need to explore a little deeper the origins of
the Aryans. This is a fascinating story in itself, but it is also necessary to
understand it for two particular reasons. One has to do with the consequence of
the abuse of the term ‘Aryan’ in the twentieth century; and the second with the
controversy provoked through the denial, by some revisionist writers, of the
non-Indian origins of the Aryans.
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 61
The Aryan background
The first thing to understand about the Aryans is that they were not some sort
of innately superior race of people. The Nazis misappropriated the term ‘Aryan’
for a wholly sinister purpose. In Hitler’s Germany the populace was segregated
on the basis of whether they were Aryans, the supposedly superior race, or
inferiors such as the Jews and Gypsies. On the basis of pseudo-scientific and
racialised systems of classification of human beings, the ‘Aryan’ race of Germanic stock was presumed to be endowed with extraordinary powers of mind,
spirit and beauty. While this racist connotation of the term Aryan has no basis
in historical truth, it was a distorted legacy derived from the writings of
nineteenth-century European scholars of ethnology.4
 Their ‘fascination with
the “Aryans” was . . . very much part of the intellectual environment of the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.’5
 These scholars lived at a time when
European imperialism dominated the world.6
 Obsessed with a desire to explain
the intellectual superiority of European peoples and their scientific prowess,
they obviously sought answers in some particular roots and origins of the
Europeans. They, then, overstated the significance of some important linguistic
research that had actually begun in India during the late eighteenth century
and eventually arrived at the misconception of the racial superiority of the socalled Aryan Germanic race. The Holocaust of the Jews and Gypsies by the
Nazis is a reminder to us of the power of poisonous intellectual ideas of a
misguided generation.
A number of scholars in Victorian India too, both Europeans and Indians,
were preoccupied by the idea of the glory of the Aryan race.7
 It was presumed
that India had only a primitive culture before the arrival of the Aryans around
2000 bc, and that the Aryans destroyed the dark-skinned, uncivilised natives
by enslaving, killing or driving them down into south India. The Indian
civilisation, it was asserted, only began with the Aryans. This facile theory was
rudely shattered when the impressive ruins of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa
came to light in the early 1920s. The dating of various artefacts and materials
confirmed their age to be older than 2000 bc. This meant that Indian culture
was much older than the second millennium bc and that there was at least one
truly glorious civilisation pre-dating the Aryans. Mistakes multiplied, as when
it was asserted that the Aryans destroyed the Harappan Civilisation.8
 With
advancing research, however, the Aryans came to be seen for what they really
were: nomadic and pastoral migrants from Afghanistan, some with an inflated
sense of self-esteem, who brought with them an early form of a spoken language
which later evolved into what became classical Sanskrit.
The Indo-European dimension
To understand the term ‘Aryan’ in the context of Indian history, we must first
explore the study of the history of languages. Our starting point has to be with
Sanskrit, which can be described as the mother language of almost all the
62 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
languages of north India. After studying it over many years, the great
eighteenth-century linguist and lawyer Sir William Jones concluded thus:
Sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure,
more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more
exquisitely refined than either; yet bearing to both of them a stronger
affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in the roots of grammar, than could
possibly have been produced by accident; so strong, indeed, that no
philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have
sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists.9
Over the two hundred years since Jones’s time, linguists, philologists and
grammarians have been carefully studying the various inter-connections that
link the world’s languages and some of their structures. It is through the
findings of their research that the languages of Europe, Iran, Afghanistan and
the northern part of the Indian sub-continent have come to be collectively
called the Indo-European family.10
There are, of course, enormous differences among the Indo-European
languages; but Jones and his successors have identified certain very striking
similarities in terms of grammar, syntax and vocabulary. These similarities
have led the researchers to assume that in the distant past a group of people
might have spoken a language that was the common ancestor of the modern
Indo-European languages. They call this language proto-Indo-European.
Much study has also gone into whether there was an ancestral homeland in
which this postulated language was spoken.11 The evidence uncovered by
linguists and philologists, so far, suggests that this homeland covered a far
smaller area than that in which the spread of modern Indo-European language
speakers live; the general consensus is that it was in the Eurasian steppe lands
north and east of the Black Sea, and extending towards the Caspian Sea.12
We have no hard and fast knowledge of the proto-Indo-European language,
and we have no direct proof of the existence of proto-Indo-European speakers.
What we do know is that, sometime during the third millennium bc, owing
to climatic and environmental changes, differentiated groups of people from
the Eurasian steppe lands were migrating to a variety of zones outside their
smaller original homeland. We know this partly through archaeology and
partly through examination of oral traditions. The people who were migrating
had domesticated the horse and developed wheeled vehicles, thereby making
their migration process much easier. We should not assume, however, that
they came out in one mighty torrent and spread out over Eurasia with force of
arms. Migrations in ancient times were always slow, gradual and mostly peaceful. The migrants spoke a variety of dialects and languages. Eventually they
came to occupy areas with a natural environment vastly different from their
homeland. This meant that their language must also have changed, since many
words and expressions peculiar to the requirements of their homeland would
not have been useful in their new surroundings. Their original vocabulary
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 63
would have been augmented and modified by their encounters with settled
groups of people they came to assimilate or displace.13
Of the many branches of the Indo-European languages of those early
migrants the oldest is called the Indo-Iranian family. It is comprised of two
main sub-groups – Indo-Aryan and Iranian – along with two related languages
– Romani of the Gypsies and Nuristani of the Hindu Kush region of
Afghanistan and Pakistan. A number of undifferentiated Indo-Iranian speaking
groups, mainly pastoralists with their cattle, had migrated southwards on foot
from the Eurasian steppe lands about 2000 bc and spread over Central Asia,
Iran and Afghanistan. One branch, speaking a type of Aryan language, possibly
a very early form of Sanskrit, might have reached as far as the River Indus as
early as 1700 bc. They would be the first of the Indo-European or Aryan
pastoralists speaking some early form of Sanskrit which would in time fuse
with the indigenous languages. The first of the appropriate contexts, therefore,
in which the word ‘Aryan’ may be used is in that of language families.
The Indo-Iranian dimension
A deeper understanding of the term ‘Aryan’ can be gained by studying the religious customs and traditions that were prevalent among two particular groups
of Indo-Iranians in eastern Iran and Afghanistan. Between 1700 bc and 1400
bc there co-existed, in that area, two peoples: the Avestan and the Rig-Vedic.14
They represent the two most important arms of the Indo-Iranian tradition as a
whole. Common ties of language,15 culture, mythology and rituals developed
between them before they ultimately separated. In their religious beliefs and
practices they worshipped a number of gods together. They both shared a
tradition of composing hymns in praise of their gods. In both traditions the
descriptions of such nature gods as those of wind and sun, for example, are
similar in tone and feeling. Some of their earliest prayers are also very similar.
Sanskrit is very close to the language of the Yashts, the earliest hymns of the
Avesta, the sacred text of the present-day Zoroastrians of Iran and India. The
Iranian prayers are part of the Avesta collection. Some sections of the Avesta
resemble, not only in language but in content as well, the Rig-Vedic hymns
that were composed by the Indian bards.16 The two groups also shared a
common practice of drinking the juice of a fertility plant, called soma in the
Rig-Veda and haoma in the Avesta, for strength, virility and awakefulness. This
plant has now been identified as a species of ephedra, and its main habitat is the
area around eastern Iran and south Afghanistan.17 The symbolic importance of
fire in the rituals of worship for both groups should also be noted. In the words
of a noted Sanskrit scholar:
taking into account the similarities in mythology, language, religious
practice and beliefs, we may safely conclude that the traditions of the
Avesta and that of the Rig-Veda have emerged from a single common
source.18
64 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
What is striking, also, is that among the Indo-Iranian speakers only the
Avestan and the Rig-Vedic people called themselves Aryans, or the noble
ones.19 So, while historians somewhat loosely call most of the Indo-Iranian
speakers Aryans, and while Iranians particularly use the word Aryan in an
ethnic sense, in that they call their country, Iran, the land of the Aryans, strictly
speaking the precise self-ascription of the word ‘Aryan’ applied only to the
Avestan and Rig-Vedic people, because they alone claimed a special status of
nobility among all the other related and neighbouring tribes of the original
settled people of the territories they inhabited.
Around 1400 bc, nearly 300 years after their other Indo-Iranian compatriots
had reached the Indus, the Rig-Vedic people also left Afghanistan and moved
into the Indian sub-continent. They carried with them their collection of
sacred hymns and chants that they had been composing for centuries during
their Iranian and Afghan sojourn. That collection is the earliest section of the
Rig-Veda. The original form of Sanskrit which they took with them would
have been more complex and sophisticated than that of their predecessors, but
their proto-Sanskrit too would have had to adjust to the then existing languages
of India. The Rig-Vedic people were, culturally speaking, the most influential
of the Aryans, and it was their great literary and spiritual opus, the Rig-Veda,
that provides useful insights into the Vedic Culture of India.
The Avestan people continued to follow the old Indo-Iranian religion that
the Rig-Vedic people had shared; but, about 1000 bc, a visionary and philosopher called Zarathushtra carried out a religious revolution in eastern Iran and
Afghanistan by dethroning most of the Indo-Iranian gods and charting out a
new ethic and religious philosophy for his followers.20 The hymns that he
composed are known as the Gathas. Although the contents of the Rig-Veda and
the Gathas are different in character, nevertheless the similarities of the Gathic
language and the early Vedic Sanskrit are very striking indeed21 (see Extract
4.1). Despite his quarrel with the older Indo-Iranian tradition, Zarathushtra
nevertheless retained fire as the supreme symbol for the Aryan people of Iran.
Even today, the one common element in the rituals of the Hindus and of the
Zoroastrians of Iran and India is fire.22
Some revisionist arguments and counter-arguments
Although there is considerable evidence, from research in both linguistics in
general and the Indo-Iranian studies in particular, that the Aryans were
originally migrants to India, an aggressive campaign of revisionism has been
launched by writers who are of the Hindutva political persuasion.23 These
writers, viewing the Indian civilisation from a purely Hindu religious perspective, have advanced a number of arguments, which have aroused some robust
counter-arguments.
The first contention is that the Indus Valley Culture and the Vedic Aryan
Culture are one and the same; and central to that culture was the River Saraswati, not the Indus. The Indus Valley Culture, according to the revisionists,
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 65
was really the Saraswati Culture, and the foundations of some settlements,
discovered along the direction of the now dried-up Saraswati, are cited as
proofs. The argument against this view is that the Indus Valley Culture could
not be the same as the Vedic Culture, because otherwise it would have been
celebrated in the extensive Indo-Aryan literature and remembered, in the oral
tradition, by posterity. Nowhere in the texts are the cities of the Indus (or
Saraswati) mentioned,24 or even remembered with pride and affection. This
seems very curious for a people who recited, and passed down the generations,
thousands of hymns and verses in the oral tradition. The fact of the matter is
that the Indus Valley Culture came to light only in the nineteenth century,
and it was not recognised in India until then. The Saraswati river was drying
up even at the time the Aryans were first settling in India; most likely, the
Saraswati that is glowingly described in the Vedic texts could actually be the
River Harahvaiti in Afghanistan.25
The second contention is that the Vedic texts make no mention at all of the
foreign lands to the west, in the Afghanistan region, from where the Aryans
were supposed to have come. Most linguistic experts, however, are of the
opinion that the Rig-Veda was first composed in the Afghanistan area; the early
parts of the text include references at least obliquely to places, rivers, animals,
etc., of that land.26 Also, the Rig-Veda was composed over a long period: by the
time of its completion (c. 900 bc) the Rig-Vedic Aryans had been in India for
500 years, while the non-Rig-Vedic Indic speakers had been there for some
800 years. Their integration into Indian society had been so long-established
and complete that the composers would have had no need to remember the
dim past of their earliest origins.27
The third contention is that whatever is composed in the Vedic texts is
uniquely Indian. While this has a specious validity, it has been pointed out
that three of the oldest written documents containing any reference to Aryan
names come not from Iran or India but from Mesopotamia.28 From the
documents of the Kassite rulers of Babylon (c. 1750 bc–1170 bc) we learn of
three names: two gods, Suriya (the sun god) and Marutta (the god of war), and
a king, Abirattas, or Abhi-ratha (‘facing the war chariots’). Northwest of
Babylon there lay the Mittani kingdom (c. 1500 bc–1300 bc), from where the
cuneiform documents in the Akkadian language list the various princes and
noblemen whose names are very strikingly Aryan, e.g. Sutarana, Sauksatra,
Purusa, Subandhu, Indrota, etc. The final, clinching evidence comes from the
cuneiform tablets discovered at Boghazkoi in eastern Turkey. These tablets
record the details of a treaty signed in about 1350 bc between the losers, the
Mittani, and their victors, the Hittites. Both sides list their gods, but among
the Mittani gods are those who are distinctly Rig-Vedic: Indra, Nasatya,
Varuna, Mitra. In the Rig-Veda itself these gods are assigned the task of
overseeing the treaties between warring peoples. Apart from some of the seal
images from the Indus Valley Culture, no documents about the Aryan gods
earlier than these Mesopotamian records have been found in India; it therefore
makes sense that some of the earliest of the Rig-Vedic concepts were developed
66 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
‘in a central area, from where they travelled towards the west as well as the
east’.29
The fourth contention has already been alluded to. The argument is that the
entire theory of Aryan invasion/migration was very much a nineteenth-century
construct of the European scholars who strove to justify British rule in India in
an oblique way by reminding their reading public about how a glorious
civilisation had once come into India from somewhere near Europe. This
argument assumes a uniform attitude among imperial historians of that era.
There were those who held to that attitude, but there were many others who
simply wished to study the past in the light of the hard evidence obtained. A
great scholar, Professor Max Muller, has been particularly reviled over this
matter; but even he changed his position on a number of occasions, showing
that he was quite open to new evidence and fresh interpretations.30
The Aryan expansion
There were two main regions in the Afghanistan area where the Aryans had
been settled since 2000 bc. One was the area around modern Kabul, stretching
in the east towards modern Peshawar. The Kabul–Peshawar enclave might
have been the initial area from where migration towards the Swat valley began
in about 1700 bc. Another equally important zone was the area around
Kandahar, with links to Quetta via the Bolan Pass. It is believed that the RigVedic Aryans moved from there about 1400 bc, crossing the various rivers and
then proceeding towards either the Swat valley or the Punjab. The entire
region, including eastern Afghanistan, the Swat valley, Punjab and the IndoGangetic watershed is referred to, just once in the Rig-Veda, as Sapta Sindhava,
the land of the seven rivers. Although the Rig-Veda does not dwell at any
length on the pre-Indian past of the Aryans, there are some hymns in which
the newcomers vaguely remember and reminisce about the Iranian, Afghan
and Central Asian localities, tribes and animals.
Among the many sites and regions in the northwest of the sub-continent,
scholars and archaeologists have identified the Swat valley of northern Pakistan
as possibly the first area of intrusion by the Aryans into the sub-continent31
(see Map 4.1). The valley’s extensive layers of settlement from 3000 bc to 300
bc have made it possible to examine the continuities in, and interruptions to,
the local culture. From the surveys undertaken, it has been found that from
1700 bc onwards a change occurred in the burial rites of the people. Inside the
cemeteries the archaeologists have found both flexed inhumation in a pit and
cremation burial in an urn. This dual practice was not common among the
contemporary cultures of the same region, but the early Vedic literature indicates that both inhumation and cremation burial were practised among the
early Indo-Aryans. Another indication of change is the ceramic style. A new
type of grey ware, that was handmade and decorated with incisions, is much in
evidence during this period. On the basis of the change noticed in burial rites
and ceramics, the archaeologists call the new culture of the valley the Gandhara
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 67
Grave Culture. Another argument in favour of the Swat valley being the
original area of the Aryan reception in the sub-continent is also the fact that
the natural features and scenes depicted in the Rig-Vedic hymns match the
geographical reality of the valley.32
The Aryans lived in the Punjab for many centuries, and from the Rig-Veda
we learn that they were confronted by an indigenous people, called by them
dasas, dasyus or panis, and by many pejorative names such as blacks, demons or
cattle-thieves.33 The Aryans, helped by Indra, the war god, vanquish these
people. It is important to stress that these defeated people were not the
Harappans. Another piece of information concerns the organisation of the
Map 4.1 India in the Vedic Age.
200 miles
300 km
R. Indus
R. Tapti
R. Godavari
GUJARAT
ORISSA
Kabul
Kandahar
Mathura
Kurukshetra
Quetta
BOLAN
PASS
Kashi
Ayodhya
SWAT
VALLEY
Aryan entry
Route 1
Aryan entry
Route 2
Gandhara Grave
Culture
MAHARASHTRA
Aryan advance
Aryan advance
Aryan advance
Aryan advance KOSALA
R. Narmada
Hastinapura
Achhichatra
SAPTA-SINDHAVA
MADHYADESHA
68 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
Aryans into tribes and clans. It is thought that the term ‘fivefold race’ of people
refers to five clans: Yadu, Turvasa, Anu, Druhyu and Puru.34 Through both
inter-tribal fighting and alliance-building the Puru had come to occupy a
central position for themselves on one of the seven rivers of the Sapta Sidhava.
In due course, one of their branch clans, the Bharata, subdued them, and
eventually became the dominant group in the Punjab. This was achieved at the
famous Battle of Ten Kings in which Sudas, king of the Bharata, defeated a
confederacy of ten Aryan tribes. Various dates, going far back into time, have
been proposed for this battle, but most historical opinion has settled on about
900 bc as its date.35 The third vital piece of information that the Rig-Veda
provides us about the Aryans in the Punjab concerns their transition from a
semi-nomadic life to settled agriculture. After centuries of nomadic life in not
very fertile terrain the Aryans found themselves in a land blessed with great
rivers and innumerable streams. They had much to learn about the skills of
irrigating and harnessing the rivers. In this process too there would be scope
for rivalries and inter-clan fighting over land and resources. More importantly,
they would come to learn much from the skills of the indigenous people.
From 900 bc onwards the centre of gravity of the Aryan world shifted to
what is called Madhyadesha, the Middle Country. This land extended from east
of the Saraswati to the Ganga plains. The events of this land form part of the
setting of the Mahabharata, a post-Vedic epic. New clan formations and
amalgamations took place at this time, and two dominant lineages emerged:
the Kuru and Panchala. The centre of Kuru power was at Kurukshetra, while
the Panchala base was further east. With the steady drying up of the Saraswati
and its sister river, Drsadvati, the Kuru had to move their base from Kurukshetra
to Hastinapura; and a new centre, called Indraprashtha (the future Delhi) was
founded. This meant a certain amount of tension and warfare with the Panchala.
From the post Rig-Vedic texts and the epics we learn that there were two sets
of wars going on: Aryan versus Aryan, and Aryan versus non-Aryan. However,
despite constant warfare, the Kuru and Panchala came together at crucial
periods, and their hold on power in Madhyadesha later inspired many rulers of
India to possess this region and make it the centre of their influence.36
From now on, it becomes somewhat simplistic to talk just of the Aryan
advance. It was more an Indo-Aryan advance, because the pre-Aryans were as
much involved in the building of a new society as the Aryans (see Extract 4.2).
We are no longer talking about simple migrant folks from Afghanistan, entering India through the passes in small groups. We now have a new situation,
with the Indo-Aryans becoming colonisers. From 900 bc onwards the further
Aryan expansion both eastwards and southwards continued inexorably. The
lands of modern Bihar and Bengal were colonised. From the later epic of the
Ramayana we also learn about the expansion to the south, into modern Madhya
Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Orissa. A particular clan, called Yadu,
might have been forced by the Kuru–Panchala to migrate southwards from
their base at Mathura; another Aryan group from Kosala penetrated the Deccan
by establishing a kingdom on the River Godavari. The literary sources give us
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 69
information about the tools and accoutrements that the Indo-Aryans carried
with their herds. Chariots and carts, pulled by horses and oxen, and laden with
weapons made of bronze and iron, bore the Indo-Aryan warriors towards new
horizons. The cutting down and the burning of forests were particularly
onerous tasks, but they became easier in due course with the use of iron
technology. Iron weapons must have had a demoralising effect on the rebellious
or uncooperative non-Aryans. The Aryanisation of the entire Gangetic basin
was in full swing between 900 bc and 600 bc, and powerful warrior-clan settlements became established throughout the area.37 With the forest clearances
came farming; the village no longer meant a band of itinerant warriors and
travellers with their wagons but small farmsteads and craftsmen living in huts
and simple houses.
The Vedic world
We describe the world of the Indo-Aryans as Vedic, because it is essentially
through the Vedic literature that we know so much about them. A significant
portion of this extensive literature has been translated into English. The
literature that is contemporary with the chronological period of this chapter
consists of the four Vedas, the three great commentaries of the Brahmanas, the
Aranyakas and the Upanishads, and the Vedanga and Upaveda texts. There is
also much literature after 600 bc, consisting of such great epics as the
Mahabharata and the Ramayana, and they too are useful for learning about this
period. While religious and spiritual themes do dominate this literature, there
are many references to a host of other subjects. This literature, however, does
not provide a body of systematic historiography from which we can trace and
outline a chronological sequence. Also, some of the most abstract as well as
abstruse ideas, composed in a highly cryptic form, cannot be easily grasped
without the scholarly interpretations of those who are learned in Vedic
Sanskrit. The second useful tool in our understanding is archaeology. However,
while its indications have been absolutely central to the study of the Indus
Valley Culture, its role in uncovering the Indo-Aryan world is somewhat
limited. Nothing as exciting as the Great Bath or the grid-planned streets of
Mohenjo Daro has been discovered elsewhere from the rubble of the Vedic
Age. What archaeology can do is to corroborate, or confound, textual evidence.
Yet another way of studying the Indo-Aryan world is by looking around
modern India today and observing the living traditions of the people. These
traditions are varied and heterogeneous, but some of them go back to Vedic
times. Here, in this section, we present six selected aspects of Vedic life.38
Pastoralism, farming and trades
The Aryan migrants were essentially a pastoral people, and for a long time, in
India too, their main occupation remained cattle-rearing.39 Cattle were the
most valued of their possessions, their protection being considered almost a
70 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
religious duty. As in Iran, cattle raiders and thieves were considered as evil
people who needed to be destroyed. The Sanskrit term gavishthi could mean
searching for cows that were stolen or fighting battles with the raiders.40 In the
very early Vedic period cattle might have been owned collectively. Those who
herded their cows in the same cowshed belonged to the same gotra, a term
which later became part of caste terminology, meaning a descent from a
common ancestor.41 The relative importance of the pastoral economy can be
gauged by the fact that the Rig-Veda carries more references to pastoralism
than to agriculture. Such details as the marking of the ears of cattle for
ownership, the accessibility of pasture lands and the daily tasks of the herdsmen
are mentioned there. Large quantities of charred bones of cattle and other
animals, found at various archaeological sites, also testify to the pre-eminent
role the pastoral economy played in the daily life of the early Aryans. From
their original Iranian and Afghan backgrounds the early Aryans were familiar
with seasons and their role in the promotion of agriculture; but the farming
and husbanding of crops was something that they had to learn from the
indigenous people. The latter had, after all, been perfecting these skills in
Baluchistan and the Indus region since 7000 bc, and the plough itself was a
pre-Harappan tool.42 It was in the lush terrain of Punjab that the Aryans first
appreciated the advantages of farming crops; but it was after the dense forests
of the Ganga plain were burnt and felled systematically that agriculture
overtook pastoralism as the main daily activity of most people, and rice rather
than wheat became the main crop of cultivation. The Rig-Veda contains much
information about farming in general. There are references to ploughs and
plough teams drawn by a number of oxen; to the cutting, bundling and threshing of grain; to irrigation canals and wells; and to such foods as milk, butter,
rice cakes, cereals, lentils and vegetables. A copious number of Vedic hymns
invoke the blessings of gods for plenty of crops, rains and the welfare of the
cattle. While a number of terms describing various types of fields and the practice of measuring land are mentioned, there is no reference to any transaction
of land that can be carried out by an individual.43 Most probably, therefore,
there was some form of common ownership of land. In the villages and larger
settlements there were people practising a variety of crafts and trades –
carpenters, weavers, metal workers, tanners, potters, goldsmiths, bow makers,
chariot makers and many others – and a lively trade in their products and a
large number of building projects44 created a hub of activity throughout the
countryside, particularly in the later Vedic period, from 1000 bc to 600 bc.
Pottery and iron: the material base as evinced from archaeology
Over the last six decades or so extensive archaeological excavations have been
carried out in the areas of north India where the Aryans first settled or where
they later moved. The excavations of the Indian archaeologist B.B. Lal at
Hastinapura in 1954–5 were the most remarkable; but many other famous
sites, such as Ahicchatra and Indraprashtha (the site of the Purana Qila mound
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 71
of Delhi), Mathura and Kausambi have also been extensively dug and closely
inspected.45 The archaeologists were particularly keen to find material evidence
that would, for example, confirm on the ground poetic descriptions of cities
such as Ayodhya in the later epic of the Ramayana, but they have been unsuccessful (see Extract 4.3). The most valuable information they have gathered
concerns varieties of pottery and the transition, within certain cultures, from
the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age.
Pottery provides clues to the quality of life in the ancient world. It was a
status symbol of the people in India too. The crudest form of post-Harappan
pottery, known as Ochre-Coloured Pottery (OCP), was generally found in the
lowest levels of the major sites. It was so-called because, on rubbing, it produced a yellow-brown stain on the finger; its worn-out condition was due to
poor firing techniques. At all ground levels that contained materials dating
pre-900 bc the most common form of pottery was the OCP.46 This pottery
could therefore have belonged to the early Rig-Vedic Aryans. From 900 bc,
with the Aryans branching out from beyond the Sapta-Sindhava region to the
Ganga basin, a new style of pottery came into fashion. This was the Painted
Grey Ware (PGW), the name given to fine, wheel-made, well-fired grey
pottery with linear patterns and dots in black. With an imaginative mixture of
painted designs, involving various shapes, the PGW was the most excellent
form of pottery product available to well-off people of that era. It would,
however, be a mistake to believe that the Aryans were particularly involved in
the creation of the PGW. Practically all of it would have been produced by the
local indigenous pre-Aryans who occupied the bottom rung of the Indo-Aryan
social ladder. It is reckoned that PGW formed only between 10 and 15 per
cent of the total pottery.47 From the PGW sites of the period 900 bc to 600 bc
the materials unearthed include various animal skeletons, several cereal grains,
burnt bricks, glass fragments, semi-precious stones, gambling dices and some
iron. Of a poorer quality than the PGW but superior to OCP was the vast mass
of pottery known as Black-and-Red Ware (BRW). Only after the end of our
period, about 600 bc, do we see the emergence of the most excellent variety of
pottery called Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW).48
Apart from pottery, another product of importance with which Indo-Aryan
archaeology is much concerned is iron. A cheaper and more accessible material
than copper, iron came to be used widely by a number of communities within
India during the last four centuries of our period, 1000 bc to 600 bc. The
earliest Iron Age sites of India were located in three main regions: the Ganga
plains, the central regions of Malwa and the Tapti valley, and the megalithic
sites in south India. Many of the sites in the Ganga plains are the very ones that
are connected to the PGW potteries and the Aryan expansion. From the
evidence found, some important conclusions have been arrived at. Firstly, the
Iron Age did not succeed the Chalcolithic Age uniformly throughout India at
a particular point of time; the progression and transition between the two ages
remained extremely uneven in different parts of India. Secondly, iron technology was not brought by the Aryans; it developed gradually from about
72 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
1000 bc onwards, long after the Aryans had metamorphosed into Indo-Aryans.
It is also not particularly useful to start searching for one original site where
this technology first developed. Rather, we should think of such a technological
advance developing at different places and at different paces. Thirdly, the first
iron tools were not axes and ploughshares, but weapons; and so the clearing of
forests in the Ganga basin is more likely to have taken place in the later
centuries of this period, that is after 1000 bc, than before.49
The patriarchal family
The Vedic family, the kula, was highly patriarchal. Extended families of three
generations or more were the norm. The senior male, the father or sometimes
the grandfather, was the head of the household.50 The sons lived with the
parents for both economic and religious reasons. The sons helped the fathers
with the daily chores of farming or any trade and thus increased the general
prosperity of the family;51 they also had a valuable role to play in the performance of various ceremonies. For example, when cremation displaced burial in
later Vedic times, the eldest son was made the chief torch-bearer for the funeral
pyre of the dead parent.52 It is more than likely that younger sons were
pampered and spoilt by their parents, a phenomenon still noticeable in many
Indian homes. It was a different story with girls. In a patriarchal home their
freedom of action and movement was constrained. They might have enjoyed
greater freedom in the clan situation of the early Rig-Vedic period, but with
caste rectitude and other proprieties assuming greater importance in the later
Vedic period their position worsened.53 They were honoured and feted as
queens of their households, but outside the household their conduct was
monitored in a subtle manner. Any form of overt deviance could put them in
trouble. A sensitive traveller, with his eyes open, should be able to observe this
ancient phenomenon in modern India even today. One of the most barbaric
customs within sections of Hindu India until the early nineteenth century,
that of a widow becoming a sati through self-immolation on her husband’s
death, also had its origins in the later Vedic period.54 There were, however,
positive features of the patriarchy that we must not ignore. The homesteads
and households provided comfort and warmth for the whole family. Various
rituals and ceremonies, both at home and in the public arena, kept the family
bonds tight; and the giving and receiving of gifts (dana) would have made
individuals feel good about themselves.55 The staple diet within the average
household included milk, clarified butter, vegetables, fruit, wheat, rice and,
on auspicious occasions, meat: a healthy fare for any human being. The very
small population of the entire country, probably about 20 million at the end of
the Vedic age,56 helped to reduce the strains and stresses of living in congested
spaces such as the cities of India today; but, on the other hand, diseases must
have been rampant too. The texts give us a diverse picture of the life of the
Vedic people. While the poor, the humble and all manner of working people
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 73
carried on unobtrusively with their daily life, the rich dressed ostentatiously
and their women wore much jewellery. A variety of amusements are mentioned
in the Rig-Veda, such as chariot-racing, horse-racing, dancing and music; but
gambling is rightly condemned as an activity leading to ruin.57 Despite the
rigours of the patriarchy, the Vedic family lived in a society that seemed to be
at ease with itself.
Political power and social differentiation
While attempts have been made to construct lists of kings and dynastic lines,
based mostly on correlating the Vedic texts with accounts from the Puranas,
the semi-religious texts of the mid-first millennium ad, and the great epics of
the Mahabharata and Ramayana, we need to be more circumspect about this
methodology. The Puranas contain a good amount of credible history, but it is
mixed in with much non-historical or unhistorical material; and the epics are,
after all, great works of imagination, not of history as such. It is only from the
fifth century bc onwards, after the end of the Vedic period, and with the corroboration of the Buddhist sources, that we can be more certain about the
chronology of dynasties and monarchs. This does not, of course, mean that
there were no states or monarchs in the Vedic period. There definitely were; we
just do not know enough about them. What we do know, however, is that side
by side with facts lie a large number of ideas in the Vedic texts, and idealisations
of power are but one example.
As we have mentioned, the basic unit of power lay within the patriarchal
family (kula); a number of families lived in a village (grama), controlled by a
headman (gramani); groups of villages belonged to the clan (vis); and many
clans made a community (jana). In the early Vedic period there was no real
state structure. There were no kings as such but clan chieftains. Raiding and
extraction of war booty was a way of life and an important way of redistributing
wealth. There was also no regularised system of taxation. In the later Vedic
period groups of communities became part of a region or a state (janapada).
The idea of kingship evolved gradually from clan chieftainship, but there was
at first a control exercised on the king (raja) by assemblies (vidatha, parishad,
sabha, samiti). By the end of the Vedic period the king’s authority was beginning
to derive less from the support of such assemblies than from his own success in
the struggle for power among his warrior-nobles. The hereditary element crept
in with the further consolidation of power by the rajas, and from that point
onwards the role of the courtiers or officers became critical. The main offices
within the palace of a raja of the late Vedic period would be held by the chief
priest (purohit), the commander-in-chief (senani), the treasurer (samagrahitri),
the collector of taxes (bhagadugha) and the keeper of the king’s household
(kshata).58 The legitimisation of the king’s power was confirmed by lengthy
and elaborate rituals of sacrifice (yajna) conducted by the priests, to be examined
in the next sub-section. The alliance between priest and king, a fundamental
74 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
feature of Indian polity, became a key element in the maintenance of the
hierarchical balance within the caste system.
The legendary caste system of India is the result of social differentiation
developing into social stratification. Social divisions must have existed among
the Harappans; it is also known that the Iranian Aryans, closely associated
with the Rig-Vedic Aryans, practised a threefold division of society, consisting
of priests, rulers and producers. What happened in the Indo-Aryan society,
however, was something quite novel, extraordinary and most negative in its
social impact.59 During the Vedic period the priests (brahmans) and the rulers
(kshatriyas) consolidated their positions. The producers came to be split into
two groups. Free peasants and traders became the third group, called vaishya,
while slaves, labourers and artisans were degraded into the fourth group, the
shudra. Within a relatively small population, the groups came to be rigidly
compartmentalised on the basis of a religiously inculcated system of colour
bar, known as Varnashrama Dharma. This had little to do with the division
between the Aryan and the pre-Aryan. The two higher castes were not necessarily dominated by the Aryans, with the pre-Aryans consigned to the lower
rungs. The main reason why many pre-Aryans would have been on the bottom
rungs was that they were the main craftsmen and workers with skills; but
those very skills of menial and manual work were derided on grounds of ritual
impurity by the learned and the powerful, who could be either Aryan or preAryan. The greatest stigma was attached to pollution of the upper castes by the
lower. The Vedic texts not only contain elaborate rationalisations for the
fourfold caste system based on colour, or varna, but they also describe the
specific privileges and disabilities of each group. Many modern Hindus therefore tend to justify the caste system on the basis of the Vedas. However, since all
Vedic texts were revised by the learned brahmans, who were in close alliance
with the kshatriyas, there is a danger that the inviolate caste system as explained
in the texts is a particular form of ideological construct. Apart from the Vedic
strictures, there are other ways of understanding the caste system – for example,
by studying changes in kinship patterns or the way in which economic
resources came to be distributed.60 There are also more acceptable social reasons
in defence of the caste system than the explanations set out in the scriptures.
One’s caste can, for example, provide a secure psychological umbrella for
someone with no friends or relations settling in a large town.61
The religion of the sacrifice
Essentially the religion that the Aryans had brought with them was that of the
Indo-European sense of awe and wonder about the forces of nature and the worship of nature’s powerful gods. For the simple and untutored people of the
early Vedic period the most common way of keeping the great gods, such as
Indra (the warrior god), Agni (fire) and Varuna (supreme judge), happy and
mollified was through a sacrifice (yajna) within the household.62 A brahman
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 75
priest would be called to perform the ceremony in front of a fire lit in the
sacrificial altar, into which were placed various foods such as milk, butter,
barley and meat.63 As the Aryans had learnt from the pre-Aryans the skills of
making fire altars with bricks in a particular mystico-geometric formation,
different types of altars were made available for specific sacrificial rituals.
Square or circular-shaped altars were generally used for household rituals. The
priest normally recited the Rig-Vedic hymns for dedication not just to the
gods but also to sacrificial objects such as the altar or soma, the plant of
fertility.64 The chanting of hymns, the placing of foods into the fire, the gifts to
the priest, the exchange of gifts among the members of the household, and the
consumption of some of the consecrated food were all supposed to bring
prosperity and happiness to the family or the clan. This simple ceremony of
sacrifice, common in some aspects even today among the Hindus and the
Zoroastrians of Iran and India (see Figures 4.1, 4.2), became a much more
spectacular affair in the later Vedic period. The purpose of the sacrifice was
transformed from being an offering to the gods to a celebration of the power of
the kings.65 The kings used the sacrifice to confirm their legitimacy. Loyal
brahman priests were drafted in by the purohit, the chief priest, for prayers and
chants in front of massive fire altars. Elaborate altars, in the shape of rectangles,
triangles and trapeziums, were built to hold the fire. One such altar, particularly
Figure 4.1 A modern Hindu Yajna ceremony (courtesy of Dr N. Prinja).
76 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
impressive in its geometry, was built in the shape of a falcon, as it was believed
that the falcon would carry the soul of the supplicant straight to heaven66 (see
Figure 4.3). Vast numbers of animals, particularly cattle, were slaughtered;
large donations of gifts were made to the brahmans by the grateful kings; the
people were fed well, and the richer among them gave expensive gifts to the
kings. Some kings of the post-Vedic age engaged in even more ostentatious
sacrifices, and thereby the original purpose and the modest scale of the sacrifice
were both subverted, for the glory of men rather than gods.
Vedic literature and learning
The crowning glory of the Indo-Aryans lies essentially in their literature. The
Vedic texts were composed, and orally transmitted, in Sanskrit for many
hundreds of years before they were written down. The earliest parts of the RigVeda, the oldest of the Vedas, may have been composed as early as, or even
earlier than, 1700 bc, but was written down only after 500 bc. For forty generations and more it was handed down by word of mouth by bards and poets,
who chanted the sacred hymns and the ritual prayers (see Extract 4.4). Even
today the oral tradition is continued. During the transition from the oral to the
written it is natural that both the language and the ideas to be conveyed by the
language would have evolved; and linguists have also noted certain differences
Figure 4.2 A modern Zoroastrian fire ceremony (private family photo).
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 77
between what is known as the earlier Vedic Sanskrit from the later Classical
Sanskrit.
The Vedas constitute the very heart of the Indo-Aryan literature of this
period. The word veda simply means ‘knowledge’ – the best of all knowledge
in Hindu eyes. There are four main Vedas – Rig-Veda, Sama-Veda, Yajur-Veda
and Atharva-Veda – and each has a core, called Samhita, which is a collection of
metrical hymns and prayers, spells and exorcisms, mixed in some cases with
prose passages. The principal Veda is the Rig-Veda, which, until the Harappan
script is deciphered, must be considered as the oldest significant extant Indian
text. It is also the first major composition in any Indo-European tongue. It has
ten books or mandalas, with 1,028 hymns and 10,600 verses in all. The books
were composed by sages and poets from different priestly families over a period
of at least 500 years (1400 bc to 900 bc), if not earlier. The sacred hymns were
addressed, in the sacrificial ceremonies of nature worship, to the principal
Aryan gods such as Agni and Indra, and to gods such as Varuna and Surya. In
the other three Vedas we see the first of the changes affecting the Indo-Aryan
religion. The Sama-Veda is a rearranged version of some of the hymns of the
Rig-Veda, but set to music. It is the first Indian treatise on music and chants, so
essential in most Hindu worship. The Yajur-Veda, which is divided into two
versions, known as Black and White Yajur, is the manual of the priest. One of
the key duties of a Vedic priest, as we have already mentioned, was to perform
a sacrificial ceremony for the glory of the king. As has also been mentioned,
Figure 4.3 A falcon altar (by permission of Dr George Joseph).
The
78 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
this was done around a fire altar, and the geometry involved in the construction
of the altars is alluded to in the texts attached to the Yajur-Veda and known as
Sulvasutra.
67 In fact, one way of understanding all the Vedas is to imagine them
as ‘a vast and complex instruction manual for the sacrifice . . . rather than as
sacred books. Sacrifice preceded the Vedas, not vice-versa.’68 The Atharva-Veda
consists of material of a more popular character; and it includes references to
plants, herbs and diseases; it may be described as the first Indian treatise on
medicine.69
Attached to the Samhitas of the Vedas are the Brahmanas, which interpret
the rituals. They form a manual of worship and provide explanations of the
Samhitas. In many ways they Hinduise the Indo-European aspects of the Vedas
by emphasising the role of the priest in the great sacrifices. Some of the best
Brahmanas are Aitareya Brahmana attached to the Rig-Veda, the Jaiminiya Brahmana attached to the Sama-Veda, and the Taittiriya and Satapatha Brahmana
attached to the Yajur-Veda. The Taittiriya and Satapatha Brahmana provide
information about astronomy and geometry. Both subjects were vital to the
work of the priests and the learned interpreters. Astronomical calculations
helped with the forecasting of seasons and the construction of calendars for
determining the auspicious occasions for the great sacrifices. Geometry served
a religious function because its noblest use was in the designing of fire altars. It
is worth pointing out that the technical results in these subjects can only be
elucidated by understanding the meaning of precisely expressed concepts in
Sanskrit aphorisms. Hindus consider the Vedas and the Brahmanas as knowledge
born out of Shruti, which means inspired revelation, as against the later classical
and traditional knowledge, which they term Smriti, or what might simply be
called man-made transmitted knowledge. The Aranyakas, or the forest-books,
are the concluding portions of the Brahmanas; they are concerned not with
ritual, but with mysticism. A class of texts constituting the last stage or the
end of Veda, Vedanta, is known as the Upanishads. These are normally embedded
in the Aranyakas or form their supplements. It is in the Upanishads that some
of the deeper questions of cosmological and personal significance are raised. It
has been argued that both the Aranyakas and the Upanishads represent the
thoughts and speculations of intellectually and spiritually advanced thinkers
who were less interested in the ritualism of Vedic sacrifices; they foreshadowed
the dissenting tradition that emerged after 600 bc70 (see Extract 4.5).
We can obtain a flavour of what was meant by learning in ancient India by
studying the Upanishads. There are over a hundred of them, and each Upanishad
is concerned with the student sitting at the master’s feet and receiving
instruction. Most of the instruction concerned the main religious concepts of
Hinduism, such as the Universal Soul, or Brahman, and the Universal Self, or
Atman, and how ordinary mortals can reach union with the Divine through
meditation and yoga. The teaching style was not didactic but discursive and
intellectual and, channelled through a variety of pedagogical tools, such as
Socratic dialogue, or posing questions in the form of riddles and paradoxes, the
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 79
teacher stimulated the student’s imagination and thinking. At the same time,
the skills of memorisation were highly esteemed, and students were encouraged
to learn by rote the main verses.71 This intense guru–student interaction and
relationship is one of ancient India’s greatest but largely unacknowledged
contributions to the theory of learning.
Learning was not just about religion in the abstract. The students had to
combine that with the study of the Sutras, or traditional learning, concerned
with ritual and customary law. Then there were certain texts called the
Vedangas, which concentrated on such skills as phonetics and pronunciation
(Siksha); metres (Chhandas); grammar (Vyakrana); etymology, or understanding
roots of words (Mirukti); religious practice (Kalpa); and astronomy and
astrology (Jyotisha). Another group of texts, the Upa-Vedas, contain information
on secular subjects, such as medicine (Ayur-Veda), war or, literally, archery
(Dhanur-Veda), architecture (Sthapathya-Veda) and music and arts (GandharvaVeda). These works clearly demonstrate a wide range of interest shown by the
Indo-Aryan intellectuals, professionals and practitioners in theoretical and
practical studies.
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 4.1 Pertinent Sanskrit/Avestan equivalents of
 some random words
The very close similarity between Vedic Sanskrit and Avestan provides
one indication of the common origins of the Aryans of India and Iran.
yo vo apo vasvish yajate asuranish asurasya vashishthabyo hotrabhyo
(Sanskrit)
yo vo apo vanguhish yazaite ahuranish ahurahe vahishtabyo zaothrabyo
(Avestan)
he who worships you, the good waters, the Ahurian wives of Ahura, with best
libations (English)
 English Sanskrit Avestan
 horse asva- aspa-
 cattle pasu- pasu-
 pasture gavyuti- gaoyaoti-
 cow go- gav-
 earth bhumi- bumi-
 plough krs- karsh-
 (to) bind bandh- band-
 (to) believe sraddha- zrazda-
 (to) know vid- vid-
80 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
 English Sanskrit Avestan
 man nar- nar-
 woman jani-/nari- jani-/nairi-
 brother bhratar- bratar-
 son putra- puthra-
 daughter duhitar- dugedar-
 intelligence buddhi- baodha-
 full purna- perena-
 part bhaga- bagha-
 army sena- haena-
 worship yajna- yasnaSource: from a note communicated to the author by Mr Farrokh Vajifdar,
Fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain.
Extract 4.2 The pre-Aryan legacy
The Aryan advance through north India did not result in the elimination of the pre-Aryan people or culture. Both the Aryan and the
pre-Aryan learnt to co-exist. The Aryan might have become more
dominant, but the native Indians’ influence and usefulness in the new
Indo-Aryan society remained pervasive. For example, in the event of
the union of Aryan men and non-Aryan women, the children were
greatly influenced by their mothers in matters of custom and attitude.
The migrant Aryans also learnt from the pre-Aryans a great deal about
the Indian landscape and the semi-medical esoteric knowledge concerning herbal drugs and charms. One aspect of the Vedic religion in
which both the Aryan and the pre-Aryan rituals were brought together
was the ceremony of worship. While the Aryans made their ritual of
homa, associated with fire-worship, an act of thanks to the gods for
favours bestowed by them, the pre-Aryans used a ceremony called the
puja as a way of invoking the supreme Spirit into an object and then
meditating upon that object. In an act of compromise, the Aryan and
the pre-Aryan combined the two rituals by introducing the fire-cult
into the puja ceremony.
There are not many definitive works on this subject, but interesting
ideas may be found in Alain Daniélou, A Brief History of India, Rochester,
VT: Inner Traditions, 2003, pp. 11–38; the multi-volume Cultural
Heritage of India, published by the Ramakrishna Mission Institute of
Culture (Calcutta, 1970); A.L. Basham, Studies in Indian History and
Culture, Calcutta: Sambodhi, 1964, pp. 20–29; and John R Marr, ‘The
Early Dravidians’, in A.L. Basham (ed.), A Cultural History of India,
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975, pp. 30–37.
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 81
Extract 4.3 Description of Ayodhya in the Ramayana
Since Ayodhya is a place of great significance for both the Hindus and
the Jains, archaeologists have undertaken a number of excavations in the
city, in order to retrieve some of the ancient glory in the form of impressive ruins or monuments. Alas, apart from a burnt brick fortification
wall, a ditch and some indifferent structures, nothing much of archaeological value has come to light that can directly corroborate the contents
of the following beautiful passage from the Ramayana. The reason for
this could be that Ayodhya has been such an established site for so many
centuries that it is just too difficult for archaeologists to dig really deeply
in the central populated area. Or was Valmiki just imagining rather than
describing?
On Sarju’s bank of ample size,
The happy realm of Kosal lies
With fertile length of fair champaign
And flocks and herds and wealth of grain . . .
There, famous in her old renown,
Ayodhya stands[,] the royal town,
In bygone ages built and planned
By sainted Manu’s princely hand
Imperial seat[,] and her walls extend
Twelve measured leagues from end to end,
And three in width from side to side,
With square and palace beautified.
Her gates at even distance stand;
Her ample roads are wisely planned.
Right glorious is her royal street,
Where streams allay the dust and heat,
On level ground and even row
Her house[s] rise in goodly show:
Terrace and palace, arch and gate
The queenly city decorate.
High are her ramparts, strong and vast,
By ways at even distance passed
With circling moat, both deep and wide,
And store of weapons fortified . . .
She seems a painted city, fair
With chess-board line and even square.
Source: Ralph Griffith, from The Ramayana of Valmiki, Benares, 1915,
Book 1, canto 5; quoted in Niharranjan Ray et al., A Sourcebook of Indian
Civilization, Hyderabad: Orient Longman, 2000, pp. 222–3. Read also
82 The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age
F.R. Allchin, Archaeology of Early Historic South Asia, Cambridge: CUP,
1995, and D.K. Chakrabarti, The Archaeology of Ancient Indian Cities,
Oxford: OUP, 1998.
Extract 4.4 Verses from two well-known hymns of the
Rig-Veda
1 The hymn of creation: Rig-Veda Book X, 129.6 and 129.7
The last line from verse 7 is an indication of the early Indian thinkers’
doubts and uncertainty about creation. This is in marked contrast to the
definitive positions on this issue taken up by some modern-day dogmatists and fundamentalists.
(6): Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it
 was born and whence comes this creation?
 The Gods are later than this world’s production. Who knows
 then whence it first came into being?
(7): He, the first origin of this creation, whether he formed it all
 or did not form it,
 Whose eye controls this world in the highest heaven, he verily
 knows it, or perhaps he knows not.
2 The hymn of the sacrifice of Purusha, the first man: Rig-Veda
 Book X, 90.11–12
The hymn itself was a later addition to the Rig-Veda, but the two verses
have been quoted, time and again, by the orthodox in support of the caste
system. This is a pity, because caste is thereby legitimised by so-called
religious sanction.
(11): When they divided Purusha how many portions did they make?
 What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call
 his thighs and feet?
(12): The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rajanya
 made.
 His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sudra was
 produced.
Source: Ralph T.H. Griffith, The Hymns of the Rig-Veda, Vol. 2, Benares:
E.J. Lazarus, 1920, pp. 519 and 576.
The Indo-Aryans in the Vedic Age 83
Extract 4.5 An early example of dissent against the idea
 of Vedic sacrifice
. . . The fools who delight in [the] sacrificial ritual as the highest
 spiritual good go again and again through the cycle of old age and
 death.
Abiding in the midst of ignorance, wise only according to their own
 estimate, thinking themselves to be learned, but really obtuse,
 these fools go round in a circle like blind men led by one who is
 himself blind.
Regarding sacrifice and merit as most important, the deluded ones do
 not know of any other higher spiritual good. . . . 

Two sets of developments were to change the face of most of north India during
the three centuries after 600 bc. Firstly, a complex state system encompassing
princely kingdoms and clan states emerged out of the petty polities of the
Vedic period. This led to a hierarchy of states through warfare, duplicity and
alliances; and this in turn resulted in the emergence of a single most powerful
state, Magadha, which would eventually become the heartland of a great panIndian Mauryan empire, the subject of our next chapter. From a very early
stage, the newly emerged state system came to be challenged by two foreign
intrusions and influences, those of the Achaemenid rulers of Persia and the
Macedonians/Greeks, the results of which affected India to a certain extent.
Secondly, the systemic power wielded by the rulers, along with the benefits of
iron technology, created huge agricultural surpluses for supporting nonagricultural populations in the new urban centres that developed during this
period. This new phase of urbanism engendered much dynamism in the socioeconomic life of north India. The urban people, however, were less receptive to
the Brahmanic hegemony, and many came to be influenced by various dissenting traditions, particularly Jainism and Buddhism. Despite all the turmoil of
change, Indian intellectual life remained as vigorous as ever, with new
literatures being added to the enormous stock of knowledge compiled by Vedic
teachers during the previous thousand years.
Politics and the geography of power
By 600 bc the geography of India was understood by its learned people in
terms of five large regions.1
 These were: Madhyadesha, the Middle Country;
Praticya, the western lands; Pracya, the east; Uttarapatha, the northern route;
and Dakshinapatha, the southern route (see Map 5.1).
The Madhyadesha was the original core land around the Kurukshetra plain,
which gradually encompassed the Ganga–Yamuna doab and the lands west of
Prayag. Southwards, it tended to extend towards the Vindhya and Aravalli
ranges; in future centuries, the entire area came to be called Aryavarta. The
western lands of Praticya encompassed all the territory from eastern Afghanistan
to the Aravalli hills. Two routes were already known then: one through the
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 87
Bolan Pass and the other along the sea coast. Since the Persians considered the
plain of the River Indus as their eastern frontier and the Indians regarded
eastern Afghanistan as part of their sphere of influence, there was much warfare
between the two. The east, Pracya, meant all lands between Prayag and the
Ganga delta. It would be the east that would decide the destiny of India for the
next thousand years, because that was where the ascendancy of the Magadhan
state was established. Uttarapatha, the northern route, led to the north and
northwest beyond the Pamirs and the Himalayas and towards Central Asia.
Here, in this rugged mountainous terrain, lived (and still live) hardy and selfsufficient ethnic and tribal groups who looked both towards Afghanistan and
Rajghat (Benares/Varanasi)
Valabhi
Ujjian
Taxila
GANDHARA
KURU
PANCHALA
MATSYA KOSALA
VATSA
AVANTI
CHEDI
MALLAS
VRIJI
KASHI
ANGA
MAGADHA
ASMAKA
PRACYA
KAMBOJA
PRATICYA
UTTARAPATHA
Vaishali
Rajagriha
Pataliputra SHAURASENA
MADHYADESHA
DAKSHINAPATHA
Prayag
200 miles
300 km
Map 5.1 Regions and states in ancient India.
88 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
Central Asia on the one hand, and towards the Madhyadesha on the other. In
contrast to these four regions during this period, there was much less certainty
about the boundaries of Dakshinapatha. At first, the south began beyond the
gates of the Middle Country; but, as the Middle Country itself expanded
southwards and pushed towards the Vindhya range, the northern limits of the
south came to be revised. The Aryanisation process accompanied the northern
expansion, and the first three south-lying regions to be heavily influenced by
the colonisers from Madhyadesha were Karnataka, Andhra and Kalinga.
Clan states and kingdoms
Around the eighth century bc the janapadas, or the territories of the janas, the
peoples, became more clearly marked.2
 There must have been numerous
janapadas; in a unique grammatical compendium, the Ashtadhyayi of Panini,
sixty-nine polities of various sizes are named.3
 There were many amalgamations
that eventually created sixteen mahajanapadas, or the greater states (see Map
5.1). Their geographical spread provides us with a clearer understanding of
how human settlement patterns in the northern part of South Asia evolved up
to 600 bc. The focus of settlement in the Harappan era was the Indus basin; in
the early Vedic period it was Punjab; then it moved eastwards, and by the end
of the Vedic age the entire Gangetic basin consisted of eleven of the sixteen
mahajanapadas and their capital cities. Central and peninsular India had only
three between them, and there were two in the northwest.
As for their political structures, both the janapadas and the mahajanapadas
can be classified into two groups: a smaller one of clan states, and the greater
one of numerous kingdoms. The clan states were situated mostly on the
periphery of the heartland kingdoms, in the Himalayan foothills, northwest
India, Punjab, Sind, and central and western India. The people of the clan
states, hardy and independent-minded hill people, continued with the ancient
clan traditions of working together with others whom they regarded of as part
of a bigger family, which was the clan. Two mahajanapadas, Mallas and Vriji,
became the most important clan states.4
 Historians have variously described
the clan states as democracies, republics or oligarchies,5
 and each designation
has a definable element of truth in it. The clan states practised democracy to
the extent that there were great assemblies in which people expressed heterodox
ideas; but, since the lowest orders were excluded from the consultative process,
it was an imperfect sort of democracy. The states were republican in the sense
that they did not subscribe to the institution of monarchy, with the accompanying panoply of ritual ceremonial and sacrifices; but a number of clan states
produced powerful personalities who called themselves rajas, or kings, and
who came to dominate the discussions and assembly proceedings. Generally
speaking, an oligarchy of a few strong men obtained a dominant voice in the
governance of the clan states. Although ‘kingship was dissolved and republics
were set up, the class divided patriarchal society, bureaucracy, taxation system
and an army for the coercion of people remained.’6
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 89
In whichever way we understand the clan states, there were two aspects that
were common to all of them. One was their corporate style of government. The
heads of clan families met in an assembly, or sangha, which was ordinarily
convened in the main town, and the proceedings were conducted by someone
who was recognised as the most senior. The role of the leader was not hereditary
but highly honoured; the debates were rigorous, and a vote was taken in the
absence of unanimity.7
 The second aspect common to the clan states was a
great degree of anti-Brahmanic tendency among their citizenry. The Vedic
orthodoxy of the caste system based on varna-ashrama was rejected, and the
alliance of the brahmans and the kshatriya, which underpinned the structure of
authority in the kingdoms, did not hold well in the clan states. The powerful
kshatriya families in these states accorded little awe or respect for their brahman
peers, and this was why the orthodox of the Vedic tradition called these
kshatriyas ‘degenerate’.8
 Although it is perhaps coincidental, it is worth noting
that most of the dissenting traditions arose within the clan states.
In contrast to the clan states there were the kingdoms, great and small,
ruled by the monarchs. Two millennia and a half later, with the end of British
rule in 1947, and the adoption of a republican constitution in 1950, the
institution of monarchy in India was to become obsolete. The king of England
then ceased to be the emperor of India, and nearly 600 Indian princes lost their
authority. The fundamental principles and styles of government that had
operated in Indian political life for at least 2,700 years were thus destroyed.
The early history of the jana kingship began around the eighth century bc,
during the later Vedic age, when the rajas belonging to elite lineages, called
rajanyas, within the kshatriya caste, came to dominate the military–nobility
nexus within the Indian context.9
 The word kshatra means power. The authority of the rajas derived partly from stories of righteous heroism in the great
epics of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, which bestowed upon them the
legitimacy of a sacred right to rule. As what unfolded in the epics has such
great resonance within the Hindu psyche, it is to be expected that many Indians
even now regard the divine origin of kingship very seriously. There was also a
long tradition in India of people trusting their monarchs to do what was right
and just. This sense of an unwritten code of conduct was derived from all the
religious traditions to which the various monarchs subscribed. They enjoined a
monarch to be strong, wise, decisive, kind and a concerned protector of his
people; and the king’s power was to be matched ‘by his obligations to his
subjects, as is made clear in relation to his right to levy taxes . . . The king who
takes his sixth share as tribute and fails to protect his subjects commits a sin.’10
But alas, with a few exceptions, the Indian monarchs turned out to be no less
violent and cruel, or vain and stupid, than their many counterparts in various
parts of the world in different epochs.
Continuing with the late Vedic tradition, the post-Vedic kings used to hold
major ceremonies of sacrifice in order to bolster their authority. Among the
main ceremonies was the royal sacrifice, called the rajasuya. At this annual
ceremony, the king honoured his patrons and courtiers with the title of ratnin,
90 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
the jewels, and would make offerings to them, as a way of protecting his
patrimony and winning the loyalty of the men closest to him. The king also
gave dana (gift) to the chief priest (the purohit).11 There were many royal rituals
in ancient India. They involved such activities as cattle raids, games of dice and
chariot races, but perhaps the most crucial rite was that of the horse sacrifice,
called the ashvamedha. In a semi-settled society which was not yet fully
agricultural and where the territorial boundaries were very fluid, the acquisition
of land was a marker of status for any aspiring raja. Initially, ambitious rajas
tested the limits of their rivals’ territories by allowing a white stallion to
wander at will for a year, monitored by soldiers who, when the horse was
challenged, would either fight if they sensed a weaker enemy or prudently
withdraw in the face of a stronger one. At the end of the year the raja would
claim all the territory over which the horse had wandered freely. Then, at a
huge sacrificial rite attended by vast crowds, the horse would be consecrated.
There then followed a symbolic mating ceremony involving the raja’s chief
wife and the sacred horse. The horse was then sacrificed by the brahman priests.
Sex and magic, religion and superstition, were combined in this ceremony,
with the aim of symbolically demonstrating the mystical authority of royal
power.12
The supremacy of Magadha
The greatest of all the kingdoms was to be Magadha. Its location demonstrates
an interesting aspect of the historical geography of India. Although the entire
Gangetic basin is generally considered as the region where the north Indian
civilisation has grown and flourished since 600 bc, the political heart of that
civilisation for the first thousand years, until about the sixth century ad, was
in an area southeast of that basin. This area is today covered by the Patna and
Gaya districts of Bihar. This is the area where the mahajanapada of Magadha
developed into a great state and then into an empire. Certain key advantages
gave it an edge over all its rivals. Even today Bihar is rich in iron-ore deposits.
Iron was the key resource that gave the Magadhans supremacy in both
agricultural and military technology.13 Magadha also controlled the main trade
route of the Gangetic basin leading to the Bay of Bengal, which brought in
substantial revenues to the state.14 The two great cities of Magadha, first
Rajagriha and later Pataliputra, were both massive fortress-cities, which were
impervious to attacks from outside.15 Magadha’s supremacy was, at first,
challenged by such kingdoms as Kosala and Kashi and the clan state of Vriji,
16
but her kings proved to be brilliant both at strategy and at tactics in warding
off their threats.
Three major dynasties guided Magadha between the middle of the sixth
century bc and 321 bc, when the empire of the Mauryas was proclaimed from
Pataliputra, by then the capital of Magadha. The first two kings, Bimbisara
(544–493 bc) and Ajatsatru (492–462 bc), belonged to the Haryanka
dynasty.17 Under them the mahajanapadas of Anga, Kosala and Kashi were
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 91
defeated, and the long war with the Vriji Confederacy was begun. Both kings
were men of immense energy and talent. Bimbisara, the first great Indian
monarch about whom we have some considerable certainty of knowledge,
streamlined his administration by instituting four grades of officer class,
known as mahamatras. Through them it became easier to collect tax revenues.
He allowed a degree of autonomy through a system of sub-kings, or mandalikarajas, and yet was able to keep in check the centrifugal tendencies of the system.
He was murdered by his own son, Ajatsatru, who proved to be an outstandingly
energetic ruler. The latter greatly increased the military capabilities of
Magadha, strengthened the fortifications at Rajagriha, the then capital, and
started building a new stronghold at Pataligrama which, later, came to be
known as Pataliputra. The victories over all his enemies were celebrated in
great style with horse sacrifices.
Just as he had done, the successors of Ajatsatru all killed their parents to
gain the throne. The Haryankas were finally overthrown in 413 bc by the
founders of the dynasty of Shishunaga. The Shishunaga ruled for half a century,
from 413 bc to 364 bc, and annexed the strategically important mahajanapada
of Avanti in central India, overwhelming its capital, Ujjain. The last of the
three dynasties before the Mauryas was that of the Nandas, who ruled between
364 bc and 321 bc.
18 The dynasty started with a brilliant usurper, Mahapadma,
whose mother was a shudra and who disliked the kshatriyas intensely. With his
reign we see the beginnings of non-kshatriya involvement in the control of
power in different parts of north India.19 Mahapadma Nanda was succeeded
one after the other by his eight sons, each ruling only very briefly. Although
the nine Nandas ruled altogether for just forty-three years, they are still
remembered as the most powerful pre-Mauryan monarchs of India.
Two foreign intrusions
The first important foreign intrusion to challenge the emerging state system
of India was that of the Persians. They became a power to be reckoned with
after the establishment in the sixth century bc of the Achaemenid dynasty by
Cyrus II (550–529 bc). Although it is not clear how much of the northwest of
India he actually controlled, a number of ancient Greek sources have confirmed
that his empire included Gandhara, i.e. western Punjab, one of the sixteen
mahajanapadas.
20 From the reign of Darius I (521–486 bc), the third Achaemenid ruler, we have more substantial evidence, from his own inscriptions
about the Persian stake in northwest India. The famous Behistun Rock
Inscription (520–518 bc), engraved on a cliff 100 metres off the ground along
the road between Hamadan in Iran and Baghdad in Iraq, contains Darius’s
political testament and autobiographical details; and among the twenty-three
lands of the Persian Empire are mentioned Gandhara, Arachosia (southern
Afghanistan) and Maka (the Makran coast of Baluchistan).21 Two other
inscriptions, one in Old Persian block tablets sunk in the wall of the platform
at the royal palace of Persepolis (518–515 bc) and another chiselled around the
92 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
tomb entrance of Darius at Naqsh-i-Rustam (just after 515 bc), expressly
mention Hi(n)dush – i.e. the Indus basin – as Persian controlled.22 This could
mean that Darius had not fully conquered the Indus area by the time the
Behistun rock inscription was carved.
Darius’s fame rests principally on the efficient ways he ruled the empire and
the manner in which he added more territories. He divided it into twenty
satrapies (or provincial governments) and judiciously balanced central authority with decentralisation within each territory.23 His Indian possessions were
well integrated into his empire by means of highways. The wealth of his empire
was legendary, since resources and tributes flowed into Persia from all directions. The well-known Greek historian Herodotus stated that India (Hi(n)dush
or the Indus basin) counted as the twentieth satrapy of the empire, and yet it
contributed a third of all the revenues, mostly gold, that came from the Asiatic
provinces (i.e. nearly 80 per cent of the empire).24 Gandhara, Sind, the Indus
basin, Baluchistan and Afghanistan were the geographical limits of the Persian
Empire in the east. The Persians did not enter the Gangetic basin or
Rajasthan.25
By the middle of the fourth century bc, a new force came to dominate all the
Greek city-states: the kingdom of Macedon. Its ruler, Philip II, created a formidable military structure, which was based on phalanxes backed by armoured
cavalry and siege trains of catapults. He left this formidable inheritance to his
son, Alexander, who became king in 336 bc. Alexander first destroyed the
continuing Persian hold over the Greek cities of Asia Minor by his victory over
them at the battle of Issus in 333 bc. Two years later, at Gaugamela, Persian
power was decisively broken when the last Achaemenid, Darius III, fled to
Bactria, where he was murdered. After burning Persepolis (330 bc), Alexander
marched through the heart of Iran towards the eastern Persian satrapies of
Drangiana, Arachosia, Bactria and Sogdiana. The news of his victories and
cruelties preceded him, creating great panic and fear among those who awaited
his arrival. In the spring of 327 bc he had nearly reached the western banks of
the River Indus.
The first group of people that Alexander met on South Asian soil were those
whom the Greeks called the Assakenois, who lived on the present borders of
the North West Frontier province and Kashmir in Pakistan. They resisted
him, in the way the frontier people have done throughout history, but in vain.
Alexander proved much too strong for them. Next was the turn of the Gandhara
satrapy, with its capital of Pushkalavati taken. In this case, overwhelming force
was unnecessary because of Indian collaboration. The most significant collaboration was offered by the new king of Taxila, Ambhi, whose forces dominated
the lands between the rivers Indus and Jhelum. Taxila was an ancient city
where Vedic culture had flourished for centuries, and to a certain extent
Ambhi’s collaboration made sense. His reward came with the confirmation
of his kingdom within the Alexandrine world empire. The next stage in
Alexander’s conquest was the encounter with Porus, the Paurava king, who
ruled the lands between the rivers Jhelum and Chenab. Porus has been
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 93
‘portrayed as a figure of heroic grandeur’ and ‘a worthy opponent of Alexander’.26
The Porus of history nowhere actually matched Alexander in might and power.
He did fight bravely, but his army was massacred and he was decisively beaten.
Legend has it that he refused to cringe or be obsequious to Alexander, but the
reality was that he had become a subaltern to Alexander. The latter awarded
him with an extension of territories beyond the Chenab almost to the Ravi, but
with the strategic aim of protecting his own larger stake in the Indus basin.
Alexander moved yet further east to the River Beas, which joins up with the
Sutlej to become a mighty tributary of the Indus basin. Reaching the Beas was
the high point of Alexander’s military adventure; but however further east he
wished to go, both he and his men realised that it would be a journey without
end in the vast Indian landscape that spread before them. Finally, in July 326
bc, his pride and ambition gave way before the demands of his armies to turn
back. Alexander may have intruded into India but, in a sense, India had
conquered him. He turned back up to the Jhelum river and, with great forces
and accoutrements, sailed south towards the open sea. On his way he met
ferocious resistance from the Mallavas, a hardy and free-spirited people, and
from the brahman clans who considered it a part of their dharma or religious
duty to fight him. With overwhelming force and some good fortune he saved
himself and his crew.27 After sailing through the confluence of the Indus
tributaries, he devised a three-pronged exit strategy. One army, under a general
called Craterus, was to return through Arachosia. Then, at the mouth of the
Indus, Alexander ordered his navy, under Nearchus, to proceed through the
Arabian Sea towards the Perso-Arabian Gulf, while he himself proceeded to
Iran through the scorching desert of Baluchistan. He never reached his
Macedonian homeland, dying in Babylon in 323 bc (see Map 5.2).
Volumes have been written about the character and personality of Alexander;
nevertheless he remains difficult to evaluate (see Extract 5.1). For the Persian
Zoroastrians he was ‘the accursed’;28 for the Indians he was remembered only as
a ruthless aggressor who came and went, allegedly leaving no lasting imprint
on their imagination; while for most Europeans he still is the ‘heroic ideal’.29 All
three assessments are seemingly correct and yet false. In the context of India,
Alexander’s intrusion was only a minuscule event; ‘India was not Hellen ised . . .
and soon forgot the passing of the Macedonian storm.’30 However, the settlement
of many of his soldiers all along the northwest of India, within a number of
succeeding Indo-Greek kingdoms, influenced the politics, art, religion and
trade of India in later centuries. The intellectual worlds of both Greece and
India also came to know each other better.31 Alexander himself became fond of
a naked Indian ascetic, Kalanos (Kalyana, or ‘lucky’), whose wisdom and
eccentricity were both instructive and amusing for him and his soldiers.32
Second urbanisation and the rise of heterodoxy
The political power of the rulers of various states, whether clan-based or monarchic, was greatly underpinned by the new economic prosperity that emerged
94 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
after 600 bc. This prosperity was based on the surplus produce from land that
the rulers came increasingly to enjoy. Large-scale clearances of forests were
taking place in the upper and middle Ganga valley, and the newly developing
iron technology helped in the process.33 Iron axes, hoes, ploughshares and nails
were the crucial artefacts in increasing farm efficiency. Large areas of marshland
were also being drained through inundation channels;34 these complemented
the terrain that relied on wells and water-lifting devices. Another important
factor was the efficient deployment of labour on the farms.35 The rulers and
nobles of the new states acquired enormous power over labour through such
Map 5.2 Marathon march of Alexander the Great.
MACEDONIA
Alexandria
Memphis
Ecbatana
Babylon
(Alexander died
here)
Persepolis
LYDIA
EGYPT
BACTRIA
KINGDOM OF AMBHI
KINDOM OF PORUS
ARABIAN
DESERT
Caspian
Sea
Aral Sea
Black Sea
R. Jhelum
R. Ravi
R. Indus
Eastern limit
of the
Persian
Empire
Battle of
Gaugamela
R. Chenab
R. Sutlej
R. Indus
Key
Alexander’s outward journey
Alexander’s return journey
Craterus’s return journey
Nearchus’s return journey
1000 km
600 miles
Battle of Issus
DRANGIANA
ARACHOSIA
GEDROSIA
Susa
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 95
means as the caste system, the clan organisation and, in the case of the kingdoms, the political legitimacy acquired through the alliance between the royal
and Brahmanic authorities. From now on, the vast use of labour, either by state
authorities or under the patronage of the rural nobility, came to be an enduring
feature of Indian agriculture. Through a variety of taxes, in the nature of either
voluntary offerings or royal entitlements, collected by special tax collectors,
the gramabhojaka, the royal treasuries were greatly augmented.36
The growth of towns
The agricultural surplus had a positive effect on the growth of towns during
this period. It was this surplus that enabled the rulers of states to encourage
relatively large numbers of non-agricultural people to live in towns and pursue
their crafts and skills. This development was most marked in the Ganga valley,
and hence historians have described this area as the home of the second phase of
urbanisation in Indian history. The first phase had come to an end nearly a
thousand years before in the Indus valley with the collapse of such cities as
Mohenjo Daro and Harappa. The agricultural surplus fed the townspeople at
prices they could afford, which might be monetary-based or through barter.
There congregated in the towns all manner of craftsmen: masons, bricklayers,
plumbers, carpenters and general labourers for building work; metal workers
for producing weapons and tools from copper and iron; and a host of specialist
craftsmen who manufactured trade commodities, such as glass, ivory objects,
ceramics, beads and textile fabrics. The towns were the principal centres of
trade and exchange; and into the towns poured huge amounts of revenue in the
form of both agricultural surplus and the profits of trade. They therefore
housed the principal treasuries, of grain, silver and gold, which the rich and
the powerful commandeered. The secure guarding and the defence of these
treasuries set the town apart from the village.37 Villages do not constitute
centres of power and wealth in the way towns do; and that is why so many
types of defensive structures are mentioned in the various texts in relation to
the newly developing towns. The gateways, bastions, moats and ramparts were
some of the main features of urban defence. With secure defences, the rulers
and the nobility embarked on prestigious architectural projects, of which the
ruler’s palace would have been the chief attraction. Built generally at the intersection of two principal highways, which could be as broad as 25 to 30 feet, the
palace was the building around which all the bureaucratic and mercantile
operations would be housed.38 Certain towns, such as Kashi or Vaishali, also
became centres of religious activity and pilgrimage; and Buddhism, particularly, came to have a strong following among the townsfolk.
Much of our speculation about what the towns in the second phase of
urbanisation would have looked like is deduced from such literary sources as
the Buddhist Jataka stories. Modern archaeology is further able to confirm or
question our traditional understanding. Thus, from the excavations carried
out at over 100 sites on which important historic cities of South Asia have
96 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
developed, archaeological evidence can confirm that there are six definite sites
where the remains of walls, gateways and ramparts can be dated to the period
around 600 bc.
39 These were Taxila, Rupar, Rajghat, Rajagriha, Kausambi and
Ujjain. These six towns were either the capitals of their mahajanapadas or else
they straddled ‘one of the earliest well-defined trade routes of India’;40 their
sites have yielded valuable evidence of the Northern Black Polished Ware
pottery (NBPW), the hallmark of the quality of life and prosperity after 600
bc. Other towns also developed during this period; but archaeologists are, as
yet, unable to confirm that the growth of the vast majority of the towns of the
sub-continent can be dated before the Mauryan period. This does not mean
that the textual evidence can be dismissed because, as in the case of the six
towns, archaeological and textual evidence quite often complement one
another.41 It is possible that further advances in archaeological methods and
techniques will confirm, not dispute, the contents of the texts regarding the
towns of the sub-continent.
A particularly crucial contribution of archaeology has been to establish, in
spatial terms, the differences between various types of settlement in a ‘hierarchy
of settlements’ at any particular urban site. From the texts we learn of a number
of terms, such as grama (village), nagara (town), pura (defensive-cum-administrative structure), rajdhani (capital city) or mahanagara (metropolitan city).
Traditionally, historians and sociologists have used these terms, casually, on
the premise that their meaning can be taken for granted. Archaeological rigour
has now made it easier for us to grasp the precise significance of these terms, by
carefully mapping out and delineating the clusters of settlement spaces at a
particular site and, with the help of the evidence found at actual sites, calculating the concentration of population and the constellation of power which
would have been the likely factors determining the evolution of a settlement,
from a grama to a mahanagara. Pottery findings are also significant for the
archaeologists. Homogeneous pottery types across distances and settlements
imply a sharing of technology and material culture. Such archaeological work
that has been carried out at Kausambi, the capital of Vatsa mahajanapada, in the
modern Allahabad district, furnishes us with the best documented evidence of
how a hierarchy of settlements can be archaeologically determined at a historic
site.42
Dissent and heterodoxy
The sixth century bc was a period that was ‘a watershed in the history of speculative ideas’.43 By this time, at one level, Vedic society had become highly
stratified, with gross inequality pervading its structure. There was a feeling of
injustice and grievance among the ordinary populace. At the same time, as we
have seen, a number of developments were taking place in the political and
economic sphere throughout northern India, and impacting upon the mindset of social classes and groups. The stage was set for a greater fluidity and
mobility within the social pyramid. The position of the large majority of the
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 97
lower caste shudras and the untouchables remained as depressed and subservient
as ever, although increased prosperity might have trickled down to some of
their artisans.44 The brahmans retained their monopoly of priestly functions
and religious scholarship, while the more enterprising among them were prepared to assume greater political responsibilities, thereby reaping yet more
power and prestige. The kshatriyas, or the secular ruling elites, benefited
greatly as their kingdoms or republics thrived and became richer, but it was
the innumerable trading groups, part of the vaishya caste, that assumed the
role of the bourgeoisie of the Gangetic basin. The vaishyas originally controlled
land, but were able to convert surplus from land into more mobile forms of
wealth production, such as trade. Their newly found wealth gave them the
confidence to ignore any humiliation attached to their third place in the ritual
ranking within the caste system. They were irked by obsolete restrictions not
just in trade but in religion too. Over one particular Vedic practice, the ritual
sacrifice of animals, most of them, along with the more liberal of the kshatriyas,
were opposed to the meaningless cruelty and extravagance displayed by the
Brahmanic authorities (see Extract 5.2). As far as they were concerned, it was a
senseless practice that needed to be disbanded.45
Religious ferment was particularly widespread in the towns of the sixth
century bc. A variety of atheistic, amoralist and materialist doctrines were
being preached by philosophers, ascetics and hermits, in opposition to Vedic
beliefs and rituals, in one form or another. Collectively speaking, the movement
that was to bind various heterodoxies came to be known as Shramanism. The
shramanas were the voices of dissent, opposed to Brahmanism.46 Thus, the sect
of Ajivakas, led by Makkhali Goshala, did not believe that good deeds could
affect the transmigration of souls, a key Vedic concept.47 They believed that all
individual fate was entirely predetermined. The sect of Charavakas, led by a
leader called Ajita Kesakambala, believed in pure materialism. They did not
believe in any form of afterlife; for them, ‘when the body dies both fool and
wise alike are cut off and perish. They do not survive after death.’48 There was
also a school of extreme sceptics, led by a certain Sanjaya Belatthiputa, who is
reputed to have said:
If you asked me ‘is there another world?’, and I believed that there was, I
should tell you so. But that is not what I say. I do not say that it is so; I do
not say that it is otherwise; I do not say that it is not so; nor do I say that it
is not not so.49
In other words, there is no certainty of any definable knowledge at all. The
presence of such sects is growing evidence of a stimulating intellectual
atmosphere in India at the time. The greatest amount of dissidence was in the
clan states and, particularly, in the areas of the east, such as modern Bihar and
in the marginal lands between India and Nepal. While Brahmanism was much
too strongly entrenched in places such as the Punjab, the Gangetic doab or the
middle Ganga valley, in the east and along the Nepalese border it was far more
98 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
vulnerable to challenges. Among many ethnic groups there was considerable
contempt for Brahmanic sacrifices and caste rigidities. Jainism and Buddhism,
although now having matured into full-fledged universalist religions, began
life as dissident traditions in the areas that were clan states rather than
kingdoms.
Mahavira, the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, or the teacher of the Jain faith,
was born in 599 bc and died in 527 bc. Buddha’s dates are more controversial,
but conventionally accepted as from 563 bc to 483 bc. Belonging to the noble
kshatriya families, they both left settled lives of luxury for a period of
renunciation. Both Buddhism and Jainism are rooted in the idea of renunciation.
The renunciatory movements became stronger, ironically, during this period
when urban affluence was increasing, because ‘the ideology of renunciation presupposed the affluence of possessions, as renouncers were dependent on those
who lived the worldly life.’50 Each of the two men obtained enlightenment in
his own way and then preached for some three decades all over northern India.
Both founded monasteries, and were received enthusiastically by kings,
merchants and ordinary people. They championed the reform of Vedic Brahmanism by their insistence that people should learn to give up their vices and
follies, to adopt right conduct in their daily lives and not be too concerned
with rituals and sacrifices; but, at the same time, both of them believed in the
key Vedic concept of the transmigration of souls and the process of reincarnation. They both preached not in scholastic Sanskrit, but in a vernacular such
as Ardha Magadhi, in order to spread widely their message among ordinary
people. Above all, they championed non-violence and a sort of primitive/early
egalitarianism. The credibility of their personal efforts to improve the life and
status of the shudras is undoubted; they incessantly conveyed the message to
their followers that the shudras had every right to be teachers or monks, and
there should be no discrimination in their treatment in the monasteries. However, they were not necessarily against the existing socio-economic relations
between the classes at that time, and one could conclude that the dissenting
heterodoxies were more interested in benign improvements for the depressed
classes than in starting a revolution in their favour51 (see Extract 5.3). Nevertheless, the two most famous Indians of the twentieth century, Mahatma
Gandhi and Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar, based their philosophy of life on the
spiritual principles of Jainism and Buddhism.
Varieties of literature
We possess a spectacular literary legacy from the three centuries under review.
First and foremost is a work that has been described as ‘one of the greatest
monuments of human intelligence’.52 This was the Ashtadhyayi, written about
500 bc by Panini, a scholar and linguist who lived in Shalatula, in the northwestern mahajanapada of Gandhara. The Ashtadhyayi, which is a systematic
grammar of the Sanskrit language, can be considered one of the earliest works
of descriptive linguistics. The Sanskrit language and its various dialects had
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 99
been evolving for more than a millennium, and, as Panini himself acknowledged, a number of attempts had been made by grammarians before him to
systematise the language. Panini called it the living language, or the Bhasa,
and he was the first great and true codifier of Sanskrit. Two other grammarians,
Katyayana (c. 300 bc) and Patanjali (c. 200 bc) carried forward Panini’s work.
Ashtadhyayi itself means eight chapters, and these eight chapters contain, in
all, just under 4,000 sutras – concise aphorisms – which illustrate the ordered
morphological rules that govern the Sanskrit language.53 From the Ashtadhyayi
we can also derive a huge amount of geographical and cultural data concerning
regions, towns, peoples, rivers, economic products, historical associations with
place-names, and so on. The data’s value is in the way grammatical rules are
explained rather than in expounding geographical knowledge per se.
54
Long before television gave them their current international fame, the two
large epics of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana were known to millions of
South and Southeast Asians. Besides the traditional Hindu versions of them,
there are Buddhist, Jainist and even Muslim versions. For centuries the children
of these regions have not only been entertained by the theatre and puppet shows
of these two epic stories, but also have had their value-systems influenced by the
moral message of their narratives. The dim origins of these epics lie in the Vedic
period when poets and bards recited tales and sang songs in the honour of heroic
warriors; the stories of their valorous pride and achievements/feats would have
carried on through centuries by word of mouth. The present form in which the
two epics are set out took shape during the post-Vedic age, after 600 bc; they
were still transmitted orally, and it took a few centuries more before we witness
their written form. Scholars believe that a series of recensions (revisions) made it
inevitable that the process of completion for both epics might have taken several
centuries. The Mahabharata is supposed to have been compiled by Vyasa, or the
arranger; and one could speculate that, in view of the central heroic narrative of
the epic and the plots within plots, there would have been more than one
arranger for the entire story. It is worth remembering that the Mahabharata has
upwards of 100,000 couplets. The Ramayana, with its 24,000 shlokas, or verses,
is a more compact piece of work in terms of its linguistic style and vocabulary,
and most of the original composition was the work of one individual genius
called Valmiki. The affairs of royalty and warfare are the backdrop to the plots
of both epics; the honour of a hero is the raison d’être of all the wars and sufferings,
and the call to duty and Dharma, as interpreted in Vedic Brahmanism, is the
core message of the epics. The essential story of the Mahabharata is the family
war among two sets of cousins in the Indo-Aryan society of the western Gangetic
basin, with rulers from different parts of the then known India taking sides. The
Ramayana story, set in the eastern part of the Gangetic basin, with the main
plot centring upon a family jealousy and the conflicts between Aryan and nonAryan, is a straight forward story of Rama, the hero, who loses his throne through
the jealousy of his stepmother, is exiled in the jungle with his wife Sita for
fourteen years, fights Ravana to save Sita, and then is besieged by doubts about
Sita’s fidelity (see Figure 5.1). Both epics raise a plethora of issues of private and
100 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
public morality, such as succession rights, the conscience of a king, sexism, the
honour of the female sex, the morality of warfare, and so on; they are also a
mine of infor mation for geographical, cultural and social details. With
successive revisions over many centuries, both epics have become suffused with
Hindu religious imageries. This in fact mattered less in connection with the
Mahabharata, because pious Hindus normally consider its text ‘inauspicious’
to read or recite in their homes.55 The Ramayana is, however, cherished in every
Hindu home, and the gradual evolution of Rama ‘from a moral hero to a divine
figure’56 has had dramatic political and social consequences in recent decades
in modern India.
Although much of the great Buddhist literature dates from the middle of
the third century bc, it is worth noting that the earliest sections of it are from
our period; they contain some valuable historical material.57 In line with the
dissenting tradition, a large amount of the important, and original, Buddhist
literature is in Pali, a vernacular language, rather than Sanskrit. The so-called
Pali Canon represents the teachings of the oldest Buddhist sect, the Thera, or
‘ancient’, from which is derived the term Theravadin. The canon consists of
‘three baskets’ of knowledge, called Tripitaka. The first basket is Vinayapitaka,
Figure 5.1 A boy playing the part of Sita (by permission of RHPL).
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 101
which gives an account of the Buddha’s life, his times, his relationship with
Ajatsatru, the king of Magadha, and the economic conditions of town and
country during the sixth and fifth centuries bc. A section called Mahavagga
also includes some medical information concerning diseases and their remedies
and the importance of hygiene. The second basket, the Suttapitaka, contains
five collections, or Nikayas, which provide inestimable information on economic and social history. Each Nikaya has further sub-divisions in the form of
whole books. The third basket, the Abhidhammapitaka, deals specifically with
religious and ethical concepts. Tradition has it that the three Tripitakas were
compiled by Buddha’s followers shortly after his death, in 483 bc, at the first
Buddhist Council at Rajagriha; but there is doubt as to whether such an
extensive work as the Pali Canon could have been closed so early on. It is more
likely that the true progress over the formulation of the Tripitakas was made at
the second Buddhist Council at Vaishali in 377 bc.
The Jains believe that their earliest literature goes back to some 250 years
before Mahavira, and that it originally consisted of sixty texts.58 A number of
these texts are now lost, but those remaining are classed in five categories:
eleven limbs, or Angas, twelve secondary limbs, or Upangas, ten miscellaneous
texts, or Prakirnakas, six separate texts, called Chadasutras, and two other texts,
known as The Blessing, or the Nandisutra, and the Door of Inquiry, or
Anuyogadvara. Although the Jain canon, consisting of these principal texts,
was not fully codified until the Council of Valabhi in ad 450, some of the
earliest parts of it come from our period. Most of this early literature deals with
doctrinal matters, rituals, legends, ethics and Jain philosophy in general, but
it also contains fragments of scientific material. The Jains, for example, have
had a great fascination for enumerating truly large numbers, and two of the
earliest Upangas, from our period, the Surya Prajnapti and the Jambu Dwipa
Prajnapti, contain mathematical and astronomical information. The Tamdula
Veyaliya, which is part of the Prakirnakas, discusses physiology, anatomy and
embryology.59 It must, however, be acknowledged that most of the Jain philosophical, scientific and technical literature dates from the later centuries of the
first millennium ad.
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 5.1 Two accounts of Alexander’s conduct at
 Taxila
Alexander’s conduct towards the Indians was consistent with the behaviour one expects of military men with an inflated ego. General brutality
softened by conspicuous generosity is the hallmark of such people, and
Alexander was no exception. The following two accounts from European
classical writers bring this out clearly.
102 Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era
Between the Indus and the Hydaspes is Taxila, a large city and
governed by good laws . . . The inhabitants and their king, Taxiles,
received Alexander with kindness, and in return came by more than
they bestowed, so that the Macedonians were jealous, and said it
appeared as if Alexander had found none worthy of his bounty until he
had crossed the Indus.
(Strabo)
As the Indian mercenary troops, consisting, as they did, of the best
soldiers to be found in the country, flocked to the cities which he
attacked and defended them with great vigour, he thus incurred
serious losses, and accordingly concluded a treaty of peace with them;
but afterwards, as they were going away, set upon them while they
were on the road, and killed them all. This rests as a foul blot on his
martial fame . . . The philosophers gave him no less trouble than the
mercenaries, because they reviled the princes who declared for him
and encouraged the free states to revolt from his authority. On this
account he hanged many of them. (Plutarch)
Source: A.H. Dani, The Historic City of Taxila, Paris: UNESCO, 1986,
pp. 40, 49–50.
Extract 5.2 Gandhi’s comment on animal sacrifices
The most famous vaishya of modern times was Mahatma Gandhi, a man
deeply influenced by the philosophy of ahimsa, non-violence towards all
living creatures, which he learnt partly from the Jains. Gandhi was
shocked to witness the practice of animal sacrifices in the great Kali
Temple in Calcutta. The practice, which must have been carried on in
some form or other all through the ages, repulsed him terribly. He
describes in his autobiography what he experienced on his trip to India
from South Africa in the year 1901.
On the way to the [Kali Temple] I saw a stream of sheep going to be
sacrificed to Kali . . . I asked [a religious mendicant]: ‘Do you regard
this sacrifice as religion’?
 ‘Who would regard killing of animals as religion?’
 ‘Then, why don’t you preach against it?’
 ‘That’s not my business. Our business is to worship God.’
 ‘But could you not find any other place in which to worship God?’
 ‘All places are equally good for us’ . . .
We did not prolong the discussion, but passed on to the temple. We
were greeted by rivers of blood. I could not bear to stand there . . .
That very evening I had an invitation to dinner. There I spoke to a
Formative centuries of the pre-Mauryan era 103
friend about this cruel form of worship. He said, ‘The sheep don’t feel
anything. The noise and the drum-beating there deaden all sensation
of pain.’ I could not swallow this. I told him, that if the sheep had
speech, they would tell a different tale . . . It is my constant prayer that
there may be born on earth some great spirit, man or woman, fired
with divine pity, who will deliver us from this heinous sin, save the
lives of the innocent creatures, and purify the temple.
Source: M.K.Gandhi, An Autobiography, or The Story of my Experiments
with Truth, Ahmedabad: Navjivan Publishing House, 1940, pp. 171–2.
Extract 5.3 Buddhist emphasis on character rather
 than birth
While the Indian Buddhists learnt to live with the reality of caste and
class, the pristine message of the Buddha is summed up in the Buddhist
text of Sutta Nipata:
No Brahman is such by birth.
No outcaste is such by birth.
An outcaste is such by his deeds.
A Brahman is such by his deeds.

For a brief period of less than two centuries, from the early fourth to the late
second century bc, an imperial polity held sway over nearly three-quarters of
the land mass of the Indian sub-continent and the eastern half of Afghanistan.
This was the Mauryan Empire. As with any empire, its genesis lay in the
economic and military strength of a heartland state and the ability of its leaders
to assert their power beyond its frontiers. From their central state of Magadha,
the first three Mauryan emperors evinced a capacity, never before witnessed in
Indian history, to muster extraordinarily large material resources for maintaining an imperial hegemony in South Asia. This hegemony was exercised by
two methods of governance which, paradoxically, were contradictory but
which helped weld together the many different peoples of the empire. On the
one hand, as under any imperial system, the strong buttresses of bureaucratic
institutions and administrative diktats gave the people a sense of security and
belonging but also demanded strict obedience to the emperor. This remained
the style of governance throughout the period of the empire; but, halfway
through its history, a new element was introduced. Under the third emperor,
Ashoka, a unique form of cultural coherence based on the moral values of
Buddhism came to be bestowed upon the empire, in the shape of moral exhortations inscribed on stone erected in different parts of India. These messages
constituted an ideal norm of benignity, civility and humanity in matters of
governance: they are benchmarks of progress in Indian political maturity. The
relative prosperity of the Mauryan Empire was underwritten by a huge base of
agricultural wealth and extensive commercial networks. It would be a long
time before India would experience, nay enjoy, such a bold experiment in
imperial sovereignty on this scale. The experiment did not last long, and most
of the knowledge concerning the empire was lost. However, the painstaking
researches of the last two hundred years, along with accidental discoveries,
have made it possible for us to appreciate the empire today in a truer perspective.1
 This chapter will review certain essential aspects of this story.
106 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
Advising and observing at the court of Chandragupta
Maurya
The term ‘Maurya’ is derived from moriya (Skt. Mayura), or peacock. According
to a Jain tradition, the founder of the empire, Chandragupta, came from a clan
of peacock-tamers who owed allegiance to the kingdom of Magadha. Until the
late eighteenth century there had been much uncertainty about who Chandragupta really was, where and when he ruled, and even whether he ever existed.
There were fragments of information about him in the Puranas, in the Buddhist
Mahavamsa and in a drama dating from the middle of the first millennium ad
called Rudra-rakshasa. There was also mention of a king called Sandrocottos,
sometimes known as Sandrokoptos, in the works from the first century ad of
the Roman writer Plutarch, who had learnt about him from the writings of
Megasthenes, an ambassador representing Seleukos Nicator, one of Alexander
the Great’s successors, at the Mauryan court. Megasthenes had also referred to
a river named Erannoboas, and a city called Palimbothra, which lay at the
confluence of the rivers Ganga and Erannoboas. The man who made sense of all
these disparate references, through his vast knowledge of Greek, Latin and
Sanskrit, was Sir William Jones, the Calcutta scholar and judge. In 1793, at
the annual meeting of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, he modestly said, ‘I cannot
help mentioning a discovery which accident threw my way’,2
 and went on to
explain how he had worked out that Sandrocottos was the same personage as
Chandragupta, that the River Erannoboas was in fact the River Son, whose
waters merged into the Ganga until as late as the fourteenth century ad, and
that Palimbothra was the same place as Pataliputra. He also clarified the various
dates concerning the accession of Chandragupta to the Magadhan throne and
his relationship with Seleukos Nicator, Alexander’s successor in India. Jones’s
work credibly established the sequence of events for the beginnings of the
Mauryan Empire, and his discovery may therefore be considered as ‘one of the
great chronological anchors of Indian history’.3
Chandragupta was the first true great emperor of India. He is always known
as Chandragupta Maurya, to be distinguished from Chandragupta I, the
founder of the Gupta kingdom that was established over 600 years later. After
defeating the last of the nine Nandas of Magadha he assumed power in 321 bc.
By the time his reign ended in 297 bc he had, by war, threats of war, and
aggressive diplomacy, reduced the kingdoms and republics of north India to
impotence. His greatest triumph lay in the northwest. There, after Alexander’s
death in 323 bc, the Graeco-Macedonian authority over the Indus basin and
the areas to the west had significantly declined. In 305 bc Seleukos Nicator,
who controlled the eastern or the Syrian part of the old Alexandrine Empire,
turned his attention to India to reclaim Alexander’s heritage. Chandragupta
confronted him with victorious outcome – and forced him to surrender the
Indus basin, Baluchistan and all lands east of Kabul. Seleukos made a dignified
retreat from India in 302 bc, after giving his daughter in marriage to Chandragupta, establishing diplomatic relations at the Mauryan court in Pataliputra
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 107
and accepting Chandragupta’s modest gift of 500 war elephants, which he
later used against his western rival Antigonos. The successful campaign in the
northwest brought to a close the military career of the emperor; and in his last
few years he was much absorbed in the teachings of Jainism. Chandragupta’s
interest in Jainism is the first significant indication of the influence that the
heterodox religions were to have on the future rulers of India for the next few
centuries. If a Jain tradition is to be believed, Chandragupta ended his life as a
pilgrim and recluse in Karnataka, in the vicinity of Sravana Belgola, a major
centre of Jain pilgrimage.4
Kautalya and his Arthashastra
The key to Chandragupta’s worldly successes lay in the help and advice he
received from his chief minister, Kautalya. While, after 1793, Chandragupta
became a figure of importance in the pages of world history, Kautalya remained,
for a further century and more, a marginal figure. In the old Vedic, Jainist and
Buddhist sources, and in the later Itihasa-Purana, the genealogical records, he
was known as Chanakya, the one who was the chief minister of Chandragupta.
This was all that was known, and except for a very strange twist of history the
memory of his name would have remained confined within those sources! One
day, in 1904, an anonymous pandit, a learned man from the Tanjore district,
came to the Mysore Government Oriental Library and handed over to the
librarian, Dr Shamasastry, a palm-leaf manuscript of an ancient text. This text,
which is now known as Kautalya-Arthashastra, was translated by the librarian
in the pages of the Indian Antiquary in 1905. With the encouragement of the
Maharaja of Mysore, Dr Shamasastry published the full text as Volume 37 of
the Bibliotheca Sanskrita of Mysore in 1909. Thus was resurrected the fame of
Chandragupta’s adviser, Kautalya, and his great text, the Arthashastra5
 (see
Extract 6.1).
This work is one of the most important documents concerned with diplomatic skills, political economy and general secular knowledge to come out of
ancient India. It is a guidebook for monarchs and a rulebook for citizens. While
it is not a text of political philosophy, it deals with the issues of political craftsmanship in great detail. It is also concerned with civil and political institutions
and the ways the ruler can operate them. Above all, it is a primer of secular law;
after reading the precepts of the Arthashastra, no one can claim that ancient
India was a lawless place. Dr Shamasastry’s translation of the Sanskrit text is
laid out in fifteen books, each with a number of chapters. The English text has
approximately a quarter of a million words. In addition to the names of people
and places, the index to the text lists 430 different items and issues, ranging
over a wide spectrum of subjects and experiences in which humanity is
involved. Although the entire text is concerned with material and worldly
issues and contains very little on religious matters, the philosophical premise
of the work is entirely Vedic in outlook. The Vedic ideas of a social hierarchy,
for example, along with the dominance of the brahmans and kshatriyas, are
108 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
taken for granted. Heterodoxy is shunned, as can be evidenced in the following
injunction: ‘when a person entertains, in dinner dedicated to god or ancestors,
Buddhists, Ajivakas, Sudras and exiled persons, a fine of 100 panas shall be
imposed.’6
Because of what is written in the Arthashastra we can surmise that Kautalya
must have advised Chandragupta in the arts of war and peace. There is a great
deal of originality in his ideas on the relationship between a monarch and his
neighbouring states. For example, he tells us that there are only two forms of
policy for a king to choose in his dealings with other kings: war or peace. The
operation of these two policies can take six different forms: agreement with
pledges is called peace; offensive operation is war; indifference is neutrality;
making preparations is marching; seeking the protection of another is alliance;
and making peace with one and waging war with another is termed a double
policy.7
 Kautalya deals at considerable length with the complexities and
duplicities required for a king to pursue his relationships with his peers. The
collecting of intelligence was particularly vital. It was the specific task of
officially employed spies, informants and secret service agents, and its diligent
use was of the utmost importance to the ruler.8
 What is generally termed
Machiavellian in the context of historic rivalries of dynasties and ruling elites
in European history was very much grounded in Kautalya’s thinking eighteen
centuries before Machiavelli himself.9
 A large part of the text is also concerned
with the duties of a king. Many of the personal qualities recommended for the
king would be considered admirable in any age. The king is advised to avoid
betaking to others’ women, appropriating others’ wealth and injuring others;
long sleep, fickleness, falsehood, gaudy dress, associates of low character and
unrighteous actions are all condemned.10 This emphasis on the king’s personal
discipline is part of the wider rule of law that Kautalya prescribes for society in
general. A quite harsh and unforgiving environment of rules and regulations is
to be maintained by an extremely efficient and organised bureaucracy, whose
officers wield great authority over every aspect of the lives and occupations of
the people. The legal relationships between husbands and wives, debtors and
creditors, employers and workers, masters and servants, traders and customers
– in all these relationships a severely retributory regime is invoked as soon as
one party is deemed to have broken the contract. The index to the text lists 336
different offences for which fines are to be levied. The offences and fines, in a
sense, tell us about one highly placed person’s criteria for a well-governed
society based on Vedic codes of conduct.
Megasthenes and his Indica
Our understanding of the early Mauryan world in the reign of Chandragupta is
further enhanced if we complement the Arthashastra with fragments of the
contemporary account left behind by the Greek ambassador at the court.
Megasthenes was a native of Ionia (modern Turkey) who represented the
diplomatic interests of Seleukos Nicator. During his four years in India, from
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 109
302 bc to 298 bc, he observed and recorded the varied features of life in India;
although his diary, Indica, is now lost, its contents were known to the later
European classical writers such as Strabo, Arrian and Diodorus Siculus, and it
is from their writings that we learn what Megasthenes had earlier described.
Considerable doubt was cast on both the veracity and the credibility of
Megasthenes’ writing even by the ancient historians themselves, particularly
Strabo.11 Megasthenes was certainly wrong on a number of matters. His erroneous calculations of the area of India and the length of the rivers can be excused
by the fact that no one could have done better with the sort of instruments they
possessed at that time. He also had a most distorted view of India’s history
before his time, when he wrote that ‘the Indians had no cities . . . [and] they
dressed in the skins of animals and ate the bark of trees’; and that it was only
after ‘Dionysus came and made himself master of India, he built cities and
established laws for them, and he became the giver of wine, for Indians as well
as the Greeks, and he taught them to sow the land, furnishing them with
seed’12 (See Extract 6.2).
Notwithstanding such errors, historians are satisfied that on at least some of
the matters Megasthenes was correct in his observations. The first is his social
picture of India. He observed that its people formed seven estates. At the
pinnacle were the philosophers who, according to him, performed public sacrifices, learnt the ancient texts, gave blessings to kings and led a life of abstinence
and frugality. Many of them went about naked. In the context of the ritual
caste system of India, this class would include the brahmans and various groups
of sages and mendicants belonging to both Vedic and dissident traditions. The
second estate consisted of the majority of the Indian people, the cultivators.
Their task was to produce food and remit one-fourth of it to the king who
owned all the land. Unlike in mediaeval Europe, they did not have to fight for
him, although this was not strictly true. In the third estate were the herdsmen
and the hunters who had to bring in a certain proportion of their cattle into the
cities as tribute, for which, in return, they received free corn. Traders, artisans
and the boatmen constituted the fourth estate. The fifth estate was that of the
soldiers, who did nothing else but fight, and were always paid and maintained,
thereby constituting a standing professional army. The sixth estate was made
up of spies and intelligence officers, whose work is also described at length in
the Arthashastra. The seventh and the smallest estate was that of those who
constituted the political and imperial establishment. This sevenfold division
seems to be a more elaborate classification of Indian society than the ritual
hierarchy of the traditional caste system.13
Another item of interest in Megasthenes’ diary was his description of the
Magadhan capital, Pataliputra, which he called Palimbothra. This is especially
valuable, as we have relatively little evidence for what the cities and towns of
India in the third and fourth centuries bc looked like. While the splendid
bricks and the isolation of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa preserved the original
layout of those cities for posterity, the cities of the Ganga have suffered from
both poor quality materials and periods of great turbulence. That is why
110 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
Megasthenes’ Pataliputra is so evocative. Built at the confluence of the Ganga
and the Son, the palisade defences of Pataliputra formed a great oblong, 9 miles
long and 1.8 miles in width. All along the palisade were 570 towers and sixtyfour gates. Outside the palisade ran a ditch, 60 feet deep and 200 yards wide,
serving as both defence and public sewer.14 Megasthenes describes both the
hustle and bustle of the streets of the capital and the peace and beauty of the
royal park, and he gives a colourful account of the royal palace, which he
considered more sumptuous than those of Susa and Ecbatana in Iran.15 It is
also in his accurate understanding of the way in which the municipality of
Pataliputra was organised by Chandragupta that historians have found
Megasthenes most useful. The work of six major committees is described at
length. Their duties covered such varied issues as the promotion of arts and
crafts in the city, the reception and care of foreigners, the registration of births
and deaths, the supervision of weights and measures, the quality control over
manufactures and the collection of duties over goods sold. An examination of
the departmental details indicates to us not only a high level of bureaucracy
but also a certain concern for the quality of life of the ordinary people.16 The
greatest of all the Mogul emperors, Akbar, ‘had nothing like it, and it may be
doubted if any of the ancient Greek cities were better organised.’17 When the
accounts of Megasthenes are corroborated with the vast number of details in
Kautalya’s Arthashastra, our knowledge of the world of Chandragupta Maurya
becomes more complete. It was indeed a highly ordered and well-regulated
world.
The Dhamma of Ashoka
‘Dhamma’, in Pali, is related to the Sanskrit word ‘dharma’. While Sanskrit was
the classical language of the learned in Vedic society, Pali became the scriptural
language of Buddhism. Pali itself began as Prakrit, the vernacular of the
common masses of north India. Dharma, in Vedic thought, implies a sense of
universal law or norm, eternal and unchanging. Many Hindus therefore like to
call their religion Sanatana Dharma, or the religion of the eternal law. In
Buddhism, Dhamma has varied meanings. One meaning refers to the teachings
of the Buddha himself, while another deals with the philosophical aspects
concerning the ‘nature of things’ or what may be termed as natural. However,
a more practical interpretation of Dhamma was provided by the emperor Ashoka
(c. 269 bc–232 bc). The Dhamma of Ashoka, or the law of moral virtues,
exhorted people to engage themselves in ethical behaviour and good deeds.
Ashoka’s grandfather, Chandragupta, had founded the Mauryan Empire in
321 bc, and under his father, Bindusara, this empire had been consolidated
into one of the strongest and most extensive of the political authorities of Asia.
Yet one strategic region on the eastern seaboard, Kalinga, had escaped Mauryan
control. A vigorous attack by Ashoka, in which hundreds and thousands of
enemy troops died, finally subdued Kalinga. Witnessing death and destruction
on this scale, Ashoka felt acute remorse and the imperative of repentance. For
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 111
him this was a point of catharsis, when he felt he had to purify himself
holistically. He now understood that only through the complete attainment of
the Buddhist ideal of non-violence could a just and noble society be established
on this earth. Although he still remained a strong-minded Mauryan ruler, his
main goal from then on was to establish a Dhamma.
Before we examine the contents of the Dhamma, let us digress briefly to consider how Ashoka’s fame came to be established in modern times. The principal
method within India that Ashoka adopted in propagating his Dhamma was by
issuing a set of edicts and having them inscribed on the faces of cliffs and
hillocks (rock edicts) and pillars (pillar edicts) in different parts of the empire.
With a few exceptions, the language used for the inscriptions at most sites was
Prakrit, carved in Brahmi, the most ancient of the intelligible Indian scripts
(See Extract 6.3). Centuries rolled on after Ashoka’s death, and Indian history
moved along new pathways. The Ashokan pillars and rocks were forgotten,
and the memory of Ashoka himself faded. Two millennia later, however, the
curiosity and methodicalness of some of the British scholars of India, in their
unrelenting search for India’s past, led to a recovery of knowledge of this
emperor, and a new analysis of his empire could be constructed. The early
British scholars had come across the Ashokan pillar and rock edicts, but had
been unable to decipher the Brahmi script. This could only be possible if a clue
were to be discovered from among the characters of the script. The breakthrough
came with the efforts of an assiduous scholar called James Prinsep, who
deciphered the script and thereby rescued the magnificent work of Emperor
Ashoka from obscurity.18
In India today Ashoka is considered the greatest of all the kings who have
ruled over her. The lion capital of an Ashokan pillar is the official emblem of
the Indian republic, and every Indian child is taught about Ashoka at school.
Outside India too his name has spread far and wide, and all encyclopaedias of
world history list his august name. However, no other book of modern times
could have influenced the English-speaking public’s awareness of Ashoka more
than H.G. Wells’s great work The Outline of History, first published in London
in 1920. The Outline became a worldwide bestseller, and remained so well until
the 1960s. There is no doubt that Wells’s fulsome praise of Ashoka had a
powerful impact on the consciousness of world readers.19
The Ashokan edicts and their message
The Ashokan edicts can be classified into three separate groups.20 Firstly, there
are the fourteen major rock edicts, in a single corpus or in a partial form,
inscribed on rock in Prakrit in Brahmi script. These are found at sites as varied
as Kalsi (Himachal Pradesh), Girnar (Gujarat), Sopara (Maharashtra), Yerragudi (Andhra Pradesh) and Jaugada and Dhauli (Orissa). At the last two sites
there are also inscribed two separate edicts, known as the Kalinga Edicts, which
may be considered as part of the major rock edicts. At two further sites in
Pakistan, Shahbazgarhi and Manserah, on the upper Indus, the fourteen edicts
112 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
are inscribed in another script, known as Kharoshthi, derived from the Persian
Aramaic. Major rock edicts have also been recently found at a place called
Sannathi, in Karnataka, and Kandahar in Afghanistan. Secondly, three minor
rock edicts have been found at nearly twenty different places in the subcontinent, covering areas such as the Deccan, the Ganga valley, the lands east
of the Yamuna river, and in Afghanistan. A minor rock edict, recently discovered at Kandahar, was inscribed in two scripts, Greek and Aramaic. Thirdly,
there are seven pillar edicts in Prakrit, again inscribed as a single corpus or in a
partial form, in the Brahmi script. They can be seen today at Delhi, Allahabad,
Buner in Pakistan, Amaravati on the east coast, and at three sites in Bihar:
Lauriya-Araraj, Lauriya-Nandangarh and Rampurva. At Delhi there are two
pillars, Delhi-Meerut and Delhi-Topra. They were originally brought down to
Delhi from Meerut and Topra (both in Uttar Pradesh) by Sultan Firoz Shah
Tughluq in the fourteenth century, and given a pride of place in his new
mediaeval Delhi. Finally there are two minor pillar edicts, one at Lumbini in
Nepal, which is known as the Rummindei Pillar Inscription, and another at
Kausambi, called the Schism Edict. The geographical spread of the rock and
pillar edicts clearly delineates the extent of the Mauryan Empire. The empire’s
influence spread as far west as Afghanistan but stopped short of penetrating
the far south. Also, no rock or pillar edicts have been found in Punjab, Sind,
the deserts of Rajasthan or the lands immediately south of the Vindhya hills in
central India (see Map 6.1).
Distinguished scholars, from Prinsep onwards, have translated the edicts
and pondered over what Ashoka meant to tell his people. A number of versions
are available,21 but here we shall highlight some particular subjects emphasised
in them. Firstly, the rock and pillar edicts are a key to understanding the mindset of Ashoka after his conversion. One major rock edict gives us the context of
the conversion by describing the trauma of the Kalinga war and Ashoka’s agony
and remorse. He is truly repentant at having caused enormous suffering to all
classes of people that, he says, ‘weighed heavily on [his] mind’.22 Despite this
weighty confession, it is interesting that this particular major edict was left
out among the rock inscriptions found in modern Orissa. The two Kalinga
rock edicts emphasise, instead, the king’s desire for justice and fairness. The
theme of justice is likewise taken up in other edicts. Prisoners, for example, need
to be treated humanely.23 Ashoka wanted his officers, known as mahamattras or
rajukas, to oversee agricultural improvements in villages and promote law and
order in the countryside.24 He went on tours around the empire to monitor
their work.25 The edicts also emphasised the emperor’s own sense of selfdiscipline. He refused to spare himself from the rigours of introspection and
self-analysis. In one of the pillar edicts he said that the hardest thing for a
human being was to recognise the evil that was within his or her own self; only
when that was achieved could a genuine conversion to a humanist path begin;
and he was aware that he needed to be strict with himself.26 For him, the
crowning glory lies in his dedication to the service of his people and their
welfare. Another major rock edict mentions his effort at securing medical help,
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 113
from home and abroad, for sick humans and animals, building roads and wells,
and planting trees, while a pillar edict mentions the building of rest houses for
travellers.27 Non-violent behaviour by humans towards other humans is
emphasised again and again. This may be a result of extreme guilt over the
slaughter of the Kalinga war; but it would be somewhat churlish to doubt his
sincerity, merely because emperors normally do not develop such a consistent
philosophy of non-violence. For Ashoka, non-violence extended to humans
and animals alike. He exhorted all people to stop killing animals for wanton
pleasure at festivals, and he laid down specific days at regular intervals when
various classes of animals and fish could not be hunted at all. He had enough
Map 6.1 The Mauryan Empire at its greatest extent and the spread of Ashoka’s
 inscriptions.
200 miles
300 km
Kandahar
Shabazgarhi
Kalsi
Delhi-Topra
Meerut
Lumbini
Kausambi
Girnar
Sopara
Sannathi
Dhauli
Jaugada
Key
Major rock edicts
Pillar edicts
Minor rock edicts
The geographical limits
of the Mauryan Empire
under Ashoka
Rampurva
Lauriya-Nandangarh Lauriya-Araraj
Manserah
Yerragudi
Amaravati
114 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
knowledge of animal welfare to realise that an animal must not be fed with the
meat of other animals.28 We also need to examine Ashoka’s attitude towards
religion in general and the religions of others. He appreciated that, on occasions
of birth, marriage, illness or long journeys, people needed to perform religious
ceremonies, however ‘trivial and useless’, for their own mental satisfaction; but
‘if such ceremonies must be performed they have but small results’.29 The
Dhamma was of greater value than ritualistic religion. This did not imply that
Ashoka was necessarily anti-Vedic; he desired that all sects might dwell
harmoniously everywhere, for all seek self-control and purity of mind.30 He
exhorted his officers to be fair to all, both to the brahman priests of the majority
Vedic society and to dissenters such as the Buddhists, Jains and Ajivakas.31 He
shows a profound sensitivity towards issues that arise in a multi-faith society
when he urges his subjects to honour other sects and not to disparage other
religious viewpoints; and ‘if there is a cause for criticism [against someone’s
religious outlook] it should be done in a mild way.’32 By talking the language
of tolerance and understanding, Ashoka makes his Dhamma ‘the common property of all religions’.33 It is also the most appropriate way of binding together
a vast and variegated society of the empire and providing it with a cultural and
spiritual value-system.
Historians have wondered to what extent Ashoka promoted a royal Buddhist
government. There is no doubt that, after his conversion, he took Buddhism
extremely seriously, and his zeal for this faith increased as he grew old. He was
the first king to embody an imperial ideal called Chakravartin, the ‘wheel
turner’, which is largely Buddhist in inspiration. The Chakravartin, unlike the
Vedic warrior king, was to be the promoter of peace and prosperity – leading
to a new concept of irenical (peaceful) sovereignty that was later incorporated
into Hindu kingship. He was a patron of Buddhist causes and promoted the
founding of Buddhist shrines and cities (see Figure 6.1). He also supported the
efforts of a renowned Buddhist monk, Moggaliputta Tissa, in summoning the
Third Buddhist Council at Pataliputra in 250 bc and organising Buddhist
missions to the Hellenistic kingdoms, Tibet, Nepal, the deep south of India
and Ceylon. His own son, Mahinda (Mahendra), led the mission to Ceylon.
Good public relations man that he undoubtedly was, Ashoka encouraged the
model for propagating Buddhism by means of peaceful exchange of ideas.
Having become a Buddhist, he naturally showed great interest in the pristine
tradition that the Buddha himself had bequeathed. For several decades before
and after his reign began, the Buddhists had been occupied in much infighting
over the nature of their most important institution, the sangha; and Ashoka
took the opportunity, in one of the minor rock edicts and in the Schism Edict
at Allahabad, of proclaiming his belief in the unity of the sangha and issuing a
threat of expulsion to those who created schisms. In the Rummindei Pillar
Inscription, at Lumbini village in Nepal, the birthplace of the Buddha, he
exempted the villagers from taxes and fixed their grain due at the liberal rate of
one-eighth of their produce.
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 115
The Mauryan world
Agriculture
As in all periods in Indian history agriculture remained the central activity of
the people in the Mauryan Empire (see Figure 6.2). The key unit in the
agricultural landscape was the village, and it was the collective effort of people
in each village that buttressed the village economy in the empire. It was in the
fields around the village that the bulk of the production of crops and the rearing
Figure 6.1 Ashoka’s temple at Bodh Gaya (from E.B. Havell, A Handbook of Indian
 Art, London: John Murray, 1920, p. 62).
116 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
of livestock took place. The ultimate ownership of the land in the village, at
the primary level and throughout the empire, depended upon its nature and
quality. The state itself owned and controlled, as crown lands, extensive areas
of terrain. Some of these were highly fertile and productive, but a great majority
were fallow and wastelands. Fertile crown lands were leased to landlords on the
payment of both rent and taxable produce, but only for the duration of their
lifetime. Some of these landlords, described in Buddhist sources as gahapati or
gramabhojakas, were both rich and powerful in their own right. They would
then sub-lease the land to sharecroppers and tenants against paid rent. As
regards the wastelands, the state at first organised the large-scale clearing of
desolate areas and then usually settled shudra cultivators on those newly
reclaimed lands. They would be initially exempt from tax, but once the land
began to be cleared the tax was imposed. Slaves conquered in wars were also
employed as hired labourers. Although the Greek historian Diodorus, echoing
Megasthenes, affirmed that slavery did not exist in India,34 the Indian sources
themselves contradict him.35 Although both the slaves and the shudras suffered
from prejudice, discrimination and a lack of real freedom, their treatment, as
Figure 6.2 Farmers worshipping a sacred tree in the Buddhist tradition (Pat Baker:
 line drawing adapted from a photo in Jeannine Auboyer, Daily Life in
 Ancient India, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1965, plate 12).
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 117
employees of the state or of private landlords, was made more humane in the
reign of Ashoka through the work of the rajukas, the state officials, who were
charged with the task of maintaining harmony and equity in the countryside.
The appropriate auditing of the crown lands was in the hands of the
superintendent of agriculture who, in addition to holding seed stocks, hired
contingents of labourers to private owners of land.36 That all land in the country
did not belong exclusively to the king is evidenced by the fact that there were
many estates that were not crown lands. In his Arthashastra, Kautalya has
numerous references to the idea of the purchase of land and to the kinsmen,
relations and neighbours interested in the purchase; he also provides details of
how purchases could be secured, including by auctioning; and he gives priority
to kinsmen and creditors in the case of lands sold by private owners facing
hardships.37 The concept of private landed property was validated: not only
were title, ownership and the purchase and sale of private land recognised as
ratified in the eyes of law, but even its mortgage was legalised.38 In whatever
form the ownership of land existed, a range of rural taxes and dues made the
Mauryan state a great beneficiary of agricultural production. Taxes included
those levied on the area of land cultivated, or on the value of the yield. The
assessment was regionally based, and it could range from one-sixth to a quarter
of the produce of the land. The arable quality of the land was normally taken
into consideration in any assessment. A tax, known as pindakara, could also be
gathered as a collective sum from an entire village. Shepherds and livestock
breeders were taxed depending on the number and produce of the animals. In
addition there was a labour tax, which could be provision of labour in lieu of a
tax. Sometimes, craftsmen had to provide a stipulated amount of free time to
the state. Then there was a charge for the supply of irrigation water by the state
to private owners, by means of reservoirs, tanks, canals and dams.39 Agriculture
evidentially enriched the rulers of the empire, but to what extent the ordinary
people benefited is uncertain. It may be averred that, while famines, diseases
and the lack of advanced medicine and technology would have taken a big toll
of the relatively small Mauryan population of 100 million or so,40 the rural
population were probably better fed than during the British rule in India, a
period of enormous famines.
Urban life
Cities and urban centres had once been the pride of the Harappan Civilisation,
but during the Vedic era, when the Gangetic basin was being opened up, there
was only a crude conception of urbanism. In Chapter 5 we observed that,
during the three centuries of the pre-Mauryan period, a number of settlements
grew and expanded, which we may refer to as towns, but it was really during
the Mauryan period that some of these towns developed into cities. From this
period onwards we have a clearer idea of the distinctions between the settlements as identified by their sizes. The grama, or the village, was, then as now,
the most numerous class of settlement, but in size and importance it was being
118 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
superseded by the town, or the nigama, which was a settlement between a
village and a city in size but with a specific function, as an administrative or
market centre. At the top of the settlement hierarchy was the nagara, the city.
Cities could be classified into the mahanagara, or great city; the rajadhaniya
nagara, or shortened to rajdhani, generally the capital city; and the sakha
nagaraka, or the branch city.41 Nearly twenty urban centres which can be
credited as nigama or nagara have been identified. The Mauryan metropolis,
Pataliputra, covering an area of 2500 hectares, or about 12 square miles, was
then the largest city in South Asia. All other urban centres were less than 240
hectares in size, and they included such places as Rajgir, Kausambi, Ahicchatra
and Sravasti in the Ganga valley, Vidisa and Ujjain in the centre, Sisupalgarh
and Jaugada in Orissa, Taxila and Pushkalavati in Gandhara, Kondapur in
Maharashtra, Broacha and Girnar in Gujarat, Sannathi and Maski in Karnataka,
and Kandahar in Afghanistan. These cities were political, commercial or
monastic centres, all fortified by walls, ditches and ramparts.42
The theoretical ground plan of an ideal city described in Kautalya’s
Arthashastra and the description of Pataliputra by Megasthenes are a testimony
to the vigour of urban life. The ground model in the Arthashastra suggests that
a typical Mauryan city was built on a grid plan.43 Along each side of the surrounding wall would be three gates, with the middle one carrying the central
entry. The four middle gates would be known by the names of Brahma, Indra,
Senapati and Yama. The entire city was divided into sixteen blocks, with central areas taken up by the royal palace and the quarters for the royal functionaries.
The brahman castes occupied two middle blocks to the north of the palace; the
kshatriya bureaucrats and officers took up three blocks to the east; the vaishya
traders and their various guilds were spread out in six blocks, south of the
palace; while the shudras and other manual workers were confined to three
blocks in the west. All crematoria, sanctuaries and quarters for extreme heretics
were outside the city moat. The Mauryan city was a hive of activity and industry
for craftsmen and traders, who were all organised within guilds and had
allotted portions within towns and cities from which to operate. The products
were sold not only locally, but regionally and nationally, as well as abroad. A
network of trade routes criss-crossed the sub-continent, covering the hinterland
centres of trade as well as ports such as Broach in Gujarat or Tamralipti on the
Bay of Bengal. Coins of varied values, of both copper and punch-marked silver,
have been found, and provide clues to internal and external trade.44 A number
of foreign artisans, such as the Persians or even the Greeks, worked alongside
the local craftsmen, and some of their skills were copied with avidity. It is difficult for us, after such a long interval, to visualise a Mauryan city, but limited
archaeological research testifies to its relatively large size and permanence.
Unlike in the Indus cities, however, we cannot be sure what sort of hygiene and
sanitation prevailed in the Mauryan city. Very likely these were of a poor
standard, with public refuse and disease prevalent. We know that during the
post-Mauryan era, when Indian external trade by land and by sea expanded
enormously, India exported not only its valuable commodities, which were in
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 119
great demand everywhere, but also the unwanted dreaded epidemics of plague,
tuberculosis, cholera and leprosy.45
Administration
The Mauryan administration has been studied in great depth by a large number
of scholars; and much has been written about it. As mentioned earlier, Megasthenes himself has left us an account of the administration of Pataliputra, the
capital; much can be gleaned from the Arthashastra; and the Ashokan edicts
give us further clues. Here we shall highlight three particular aspects: the
degree of administrative control exercised over a vast territory, the hierarchy of
control, and the functions of administration. The cultural and economic diversity of the varied areas of the empire meant that a completely uniform degree of
control throughout was impossible to operate. Instead, one should treat the
empire as consisting of three zones of culture and economy.46 The first was the
heartland, i.e. the state of Magadha and the Gangetic plain. Here there had
been a long tradition, going back many centuries, of a tight political authority
being exercised, almost in the way its concept is described in the Arthashastra.
This was the zone where power ultimately resided in the royal palace at
Pataliputra; interestingly, a large number of Ashokan pillars are also found in
this zone. The second zone consisted of the conquered areas, such as Gandhara
in the northwest, Karnataka, Kalinga or Saurashtra. These were areas of great
potentiality in terms of trade, revenue and strategy, but ‘as areas brought into
the ambit of the Mauryan system they experienced state formation at second
remove.’47 These were also the places where numerous Ashokan rock edicts are
found. As conquered areas, they carried the risk to the Mauryan governors of
being volatile regions. A gentler and more sensitive style of governance was
therefore needed in this second zone. The third zone consisted of isolated,
buffer areas, where lived nomads, forest people or hill tribesmen. From their
lands came valuable resources, such as elephants, timber and precious stones.
Inside this third zone it was important for the agents of the empire to create
conditions in which a plentiful labour supply was able to exploit and marshal
the natural resources for the economic benefit of the empire. The Mauryan
state attempted to secure maximum compliance and subservience from the
people of all three zones, but the means employed naturally varied. The
principles of both direct and indirect rule were attempted.
The empire was divided into a number of provinces, which were sub-divided
into districts. A prince or a member of the royal family ruled over a province
and a hierarchy of officers controlled the bureaucracy. This stratification must
have been extremely elaborate and finely graded, and one can see in it the
antecedents of the hierarchy at the court of the great Mogul or the British
viceroy. Those occupying the top echelons of power and privilege were far
removed from those at the lower grades. It has been estimated that the ratio of
the clerk’s salary to that of the chief minister or of the humble soldier to the
commander was approximately 1 : 96.48 With such a high level of remuneration,
120 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
it is quite likely that the highest officials of the administrative service would
have been required to meticulously oversee a large number of civil and
economic tasks and a variety of public works mentioned in contemporary
sources. Two of the topmost officers were the treasurer and the collector. The
former kept complete accounts for the whole empire, while the latter made the
arrangements for the collection of taxes. It was its ability to garner revenues
from all classes of people that particularly marks out the special quality of the
Mauryan government. The Mauryan taxation bureau scrupulously exacted
every pana (silver coin of that period) and every masaka and kakini (copper
coins) owed to it, in revenue, from town and country. If the punishments for
misdeeds and corruption, as described in the Arthashastra, are any indication,
it was most unlikely that the Mauryan state could be defrauded by the people
or its officials. That is in striking contrast to the taxation regimes prevalent
today in South Asian countries.
The large-scale collection of taxes leads us to ask: Where did the revenue
go? Most of it must have been spent on maintaining the royal family and
replenishing its treasury, the military establishment and administrative services. The Mauryans encouraged a mixed world of state enterprise and private
capitalism that was highly regulated; and their desire to control the ‘commanding heights of the economy’ meant incurring great expense in the staffing of a
bloated civil service. What is significantly missing, however, is the notion of
public finances being systematically expended on supporting public services,
such as health, education, social security or pensions. The notion of the state
undertaking such responsibilities is, however, a relatively recent one, arising
out of a more varied and enlightened understanding of a government’s functions. The Mauryan government would have neither understood nor accepted
the public finance implications of the humanistic duties of a government.
Architecture and sculpture
For at least a thousand years after 1700 bc, during most of the Vedic period,
there is little evidence of architectural creativity in India. Of course, large
wooden palaces, halls and barns must have been constructed, but we cannot
really tell how durable they were. From 600 bc, however, with the growth of
towns once again, there is a certain change; but it is from the Mauryan period
particularly that we first get evidence of the large-scale use of hewn stone as a
building material.49 There is a lively debate among scholars as to whether the
beginnings of stone architecture and sculpture in India from 300 bc onwards
should be associated with the contacts of the Indians with the Persians from
the Achaemenid Empire and the Greeks. Both these peoples had built impressive monuments of stone, such as the palace at Persepolis and the Parthenon on
the acropolis of Athens; and both the Persians and the Greeks could be found
working in various capacities in India at that time. There were skilled craftsmen
in stone who could have been mentors of the Indian workers. Another viewpoint
challenges this ‘Perso-Hellenistic . . . post-Alexandrian’ influence altogether
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 121
and argues for an indigenous evolution of stone architecture from the tradition
of wood architecture. Either viewpoint may be correct; the Indians could quite
easily have observed and emulated the masonry skills of the foreigners, but
what they finally produced was distinctly Indian in both reality and symbolism.50 The first piece of evidence of both stonework and brickwork of the
Mauryan craftsmen relates to secular urban architecture. Archaeologists have
now been able to locate solid brick or stone defences and ramparts in such
places as Kausambi, Taxila, Rajgir and Sisupalgarh. Megasthenes’ description
of Pataliputra and the ideal city plan projected in the Arthashastra, both referred
to above, have helped archaeologists to identify particular types of ground
plans and the layout of domestic houses at places such as Bhita and Taxila.51
Much effort has also gone into excavating parts of the pillared hall at Pataliputra,
although here the timber framework had perished. The elements of the urban
architecture and planning that developed as a process from the pre-Mauryan to
Mauryan times, and later elaborated in texts such as the Shilpashastras, persisted
for many centuries and gave the cities of India a particular distinctiveness.52
The Mauryan architects and builders were also the pioneers of a particular
strand of religious architecture which was to dominate the Indian landscape
for some seven or eight centuries. This was the Buddhist religious architecture,
and two of its forms have their roots in the Mauryan period. One was the stupa,
a massively built dome, housing the relics of the Buddha and Buddhist
preachers, and standing on a square or circular base, with a flattened top and a
kiosk. The earliest part of the Stupa I of Sanchi dates from the Mauryan times53
(see Figure 6.3). The second type of structure was the cave form, hollowed out
from the living rock, later developing into what is called a chaitya hall (see
Figure 6.4). The Buddhist monks used the chaitya as their place of retreat, and
Figure 6.3 Stupa of Sanchi (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted from a photo in Philip
 Rawson, Indian Asia, London: Elsevier-Phaidon, 1977, p. 77).
122 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
the best of the Mauryan caves are Lomas Rishi (see Figure 6.5) and Sudama in
the Barabar Hills.54
Mauryan art was essentially the art of the sculpture.55 The Ashokan pillars
are beautifully polished monolithic shafts, made from sandstone quarried at
Chunar, in Benares, without footings and with carved capitals in the form of
lotus flowers with inverted petals, with an animal or animals mounted. The
capitals are decorated in relief. The bull capital of Rampurava and the lion
capital of Sarnath are the best examples of the animal figured pillars. Another
animal sculpture of the Mauryan period, of equal renown, is popularly called
the Dhauli Elephant. With its slightly raised right leg and flowing trunk, this
massive elephant, carved in situ from the living rock at Dhauli in Orissa, is one
of the most impressive sculptures in animal studies anywhere in the world.
Another achievement of Mauryan sculpture consists of a number of statues of
Yaksha and Yakshini, which are male and female divine spirits. Among them
the most polished and sophisticated statue is the Didarganj Yakshini, whose
beauti fully rounded figure with sensuous curves might be called the precursor
of the later more famous Mathura yakshinis.
The decline of the empire: some causes
A number of causes of Mauryan decline have been identified by historians, but
it is difficult to place them in order of importance. One set of issues has to do
Figure 6.4 Chaitya hall at Karle (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted from Edith Tomory,
A History of Fine Arts in India and the West, Hyderabad: Orient Longman,
 1982, p. 61, and Gordon Johnson, Cultural Atlas of India, New York: Facts
 on File, 1996, p. 77).
The paradox of Mauryan imperialism 123
with the size of the empire at a time when the means of communication were
poor. The outlying areas always had a temptation to pull away from the centre,
and there is some evidence of the reassertion of regionalism under the fairly
autonomous governors and princes within the empire. This pulling-away
process would intensify in areas where the people felt oppressed by the system.
Figure 6.5 Lomas Rishi entrance (from Havell, op. cit., p. 24).
124 The paradox of Mauryan imperialism
The Mauryan bureaucracy failed to establish long lasting popular institutions
through which the local people could participate in their own governance. The
state used espionage much too frequently for a true bond of trust to develop
among the people. One may rightly suspect that the officers appointed by
Ashoka to promote harmony in the countryside were not above using spies to
collect information. The large-scale economy of the empire also concealed an
underlying stress of raising enormous revenues through a near penal form of
taxation. On the other hand, feelings for autonomy grew in some of the
conquered areas where substantial development had taken place, such as the
provinces of Kalinga or Avanti. Historians have also suggested that the overtly
Buddhist pieties of Ashoka had made a large mass of people subscribing to the
Brahmanic traditions antipathetic to the empire, thereby weakening the
internal cohesion of the state. This point has been challenged on the grounds
that Ashoka dealt fairly towards all in his kingdom. There may be something
in another view that holds that Ashoka’s non-militarism undermined the
strength of the army, leading to disaffection within the ranks. The last Mauryan
emperor was stabbed to death by his own commander-in-chief at a military
parade: he had been weak and indecisive. All Ashoka’s successors lacked force
and character, a fact that would certainly have contributed to the decline of the
empire. That decline was accelerated by both external and internal threats.

With the fall of the Mauryan Empire came the loss of a pan-Indian authority
exercised from Pataliputra in Magadha. There now arose a number of competing
power centres in different regions of India (see Map 7.1). The imperial monarchy was replaced by regional monarchies, and a centralised bureaucracy by
regional bureaucracies. These changes had little effect on the continuing hold
of the idea of absolutist kingship. Numerous royal eulogies, called prasastis,
from the various regions, endowed the respective monarchs with superhuman
qualities. Many regional monarchs had Central Asian origins, but they too in
time conformed to the notions of kingship that had been maturing since late
Vedic times and which reached their apogee in the Mauryan period. All monarchies, whether of foreign or indigenous origins, subscribed to the Brahmanic
notions of caste and the fourfold varna system, although Buddhism provided a
relatively easier route for foreigners to become adjusted to the Indian social
system. The political diffusion in the post-Mauryan period and the emergence
of monarchies with foreign roots, described by one historian as ‘chaotic darkness’,1
 might be seen as signs of regression from the heyday of Mauryan imperialism; but, in reality, both the economy and the culture showed dynamism.
One of the reasons why historians find the post-Mauryan era so absorbing is
the huge scale of available evidence for research. The domestic literary evidence
can be drawn from the royal inscriptions, the shastras, the secular literature,
Buddhist religious and secular texts, and the fascinating Tamil anthologies
from the south. Foreign literary sources, from China, Syria, Greece, Persia and
Egypt, give credence to the political and commercial setting of this period. The
clear numismatic evidence available to historians also facilitates the construction
of relative chronologies. With sufficient archaeological corrobor ation, we can
be confident that, from about 200 bc onwards, the study of Indian history takes
on a definitiveness that for earlier periods often eludes us. In terms of sources,
this is like a transition from the proto-historical to the historical.
New dynasties and new centres of power
The political landscape after the Mauryan collapse in 185 bc remained confused
for about 200 years until the beginning of the Christian era, with a host of
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 129
dynasties jostling for power. These dynasties were either native Indian or
ethnically mixed, such as Indo-Greek or Indo-Scythian. During the first three
centuries of the first millennium ad most of India, except for the far south, was
dominated by three systems of authority: the Central Asian Kushan, the
Deccan Satavahana and a branch of another Central Asian group, known as
Western Shakas. Our main interest in the southern region concerns mostly the
elaborate trading connections it had with different parts of the world and with
the flowering of Tamil literature.
Dharanikota
Ujjain
SRI
LANKA
N E P A L
A r a b i a n S e a
B a y of B e n g a l
Delta of
Bengal
P E R S I A
K U S H A N S
WESTERN
SHAKAS
SHUNGAS
SATAVAHANAS
AFGHANISTAN
INDOPARTHIANS
CHOLAS
PANDYAS
CHERAS
Caspian
Sea
Aral
Sea
1000 km
600 miles
INDOGREEKSK U S H A N S
INDO-GREEKS
Purushapura (Kushan capital)
Pataliputra
Key
Boundary of the
Shunga Kingdom
Boundary of the
Kushan Empire
Map 7.1 Post-Mauryan kingdoms.
130 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
The Gangetic heartland: Shungas, Kharavela
The Shunga dynasty founded by Pushyamitra, the renegade army commander
of the last Maurya, controlled the central Magadhan region for 112 years, until
73 bc. The Shungas were continually at war with their neighbours as well as
more distant enemies. Their most dangerous internal enemy was Kharavela of
Kalinga, whose deeds and activities can be studied from a classic early royal
eulogy, the famous Hathigumpha inscription in an Orissan cave.2
 We learn
from this inscription that Kharavela was more than a mere soldier: he was also
a patron of the Jain religion. After his death in 172 bc Kalinga’s power waned,
giving breathing space to the Shungas. Externally, however, the Shungas faced
an ever-present danger from the Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian kings and
warlords of north Afghanistan and northwest India. Pushyamitra and his
successors just about kept them in check, although many Mauryan-held lands
were lost. Despite the distractions of warfare, the Shungas provided valuable
patronage to both Buddhism and Brahmanism and also helped to create a
minor architectural renaissance, which we shall touch upon later.
The northwest: Indo-Greeks, Pahlavas, Shakas
During the last two centuries before Christ much of the northwest was attacked
and occupied by forces from across the border in Bactria, the part of Afghanistan
that lies between the River Oxus and the Hindu Kush. Bactria, as part of the
Persian conquests of Alexander the Great, had become part of the Selucid
kingdom run from Syria. In the middle of the third century bc Bactria, along
with another Persian province, Parthia, revolted against the Seleucids. Normally the Greek governors of Bactria were appointed by the Seleucid kings,
but after their revolt they called themselves kings in their own right. These
Graeco-Bactrian kings clashed with the Mauryans during their forays into
northwest India. They became bolder after the Mauryan collapse and, under a
monarch called Demetrius, occupied a large part of the Indus delta, Saurashtra
and Kutch.3
 The Shungas were powerless against them. The Graeco-Bactrian
kings belonged to various lineages, but those who invaded India and established
their tiny kingdoms in parts of its northwest, particularly in Gandhara and
Punjab, are specifically known as Indo-Greek rulers. All Greeks in India were,
however, known as Yavanas; and the upper elite of Indians, the brahmans,
generally held an unfavourable view of them.4
 On the other hand, those tiny
territories of the Indo-Greek kings must have been lively and commercially
flourishing places. A vast hoard of coins, with a mixture of Greek profiles and
Indian symbols, along with interesting sculptures and some monumental
remains from Taxila, Sirkap and Sirsukh, point to a rich fusion of Indian and
Hellenistic influences.5
Both the Bactrian Greek and the Indo-Greek monarchs faced attacks, during
the first century bc, from the Parthians and the Scythians. After seceding from
the Seleucid kingdom, around the same time as Bactria’s revolt, the Persian
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 131
province of Parthia, which lay to the southeast of the Caspian Sea, went on to
become the second great Persian empire (after the Achaemenid), and the power
of Parthia spread east as far as the Punjab and even beyond.6
 The Indians called
the Parthians Pahlavas. The Parthians themselves faced an onslaught of a
Central Asian group, the Shakas (or Scythians). The latter had been facing a
squeeze in their homeland near the Aral Sea from a nomadic group called
Yueh-chi and had managed to escape towards eastern Iran. Eventually the
Parthians tamed the Shakas and, under their leadership, directed them further
east. Thus, in the first century bc, after overrunning Bactria, the Shakas moved
into India too and took Gandhara and Punjab. A little later they penetrated
the areas around Mathura, the Yamuna valley, the upper Deccan, Saurashtra
and Ujjain in Malwa. In Indian history, the Shaka rulers are known as ShakaPahlava, meaning a mixed group of tribal Shakas and the Parthians. Effective
Shaka suzerainty in India came to be exercised eventually by two authorities,
respectively known as the Northern Shakas of Taxila and Mathura and the
Western Shakas of Malwa and Kathiawar.7
From the Aral Sea to Kashi: the trans-Asiatic empire of the Kushans
Having avoided the Yueh-chi once, the Shakas came under pressure from a
further Yueh-chi wave. This was because, during one of their regular bouts of
nomadic warfare, the Yueh-chi in turn had suffered a defeat by a rival tribe, the
Hiung-nu,8
 and been forced to move west towards Bactria around 130 bc.
After overcoming the Shakas and settling down in Bactria, the Yueh-chi gradually evolved from their nomadic roots into a sedentary people.9
 They were
established in five different groups, one of them being the Kuei-shuang, or
Kushans.10 Around the beginning of the Christian era the Kushans subdued
the other four and assumed overall control of most of Afghanistan and eastern
Iran, under their leader Kujula Kadphises. His son, Wima Kadphises, entered
north India in the middle of the first century ad. All Punjab, Kashmir and the
plain of the Ganges up to Kashi came to be Kushan-controlled. The whole of
the empire, from the River Oxus to Kashi, was consolidated by Kanishka, who
succeeded Wima.11 There is uncertainty as to when this exactly happened and
whether there was more than one Kanishka.12 We do, however, know that he
fought a number of battles, with mixed results, in order to keep his empire
secure in his grasp. The Kushans maintained a powerful dominion over north
India until at least ad 250; and their trans-Asian empire became one of the
great conduits for India’s international trade.
Kanishka, however, was more than a soldier and conventional emperor.
Although personally ‘cruel and temperamental’,13 he provided the framework
of a firm and fair rule of law based on Buddhist precepts. He was also a great
compromiser and synthesiser of different ideas. In his empire many religious
traditions flourished: Persian Zoroastrian, Greek and Roman paganism, Buddhism, Chinese Confucianism, Jainism and, above all, a whole range of Vedic
traditions. His coins bear their proof, because they carry images of deities from
132 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
the various religions practised in his kingdom. In keeping with the broad
Indian political conventions, Kanishka allowed space to differing ideas. Buddhists, however, consider Kanishka as second in importance only to Ashoka
Maurya, because under his rule Buddhism had flourished as never before.14 At
the Kushana capital in Purushapura he built an enormous stupa, nearly 700
feet high and 300 feet in diameter, for Buddhist pilgrims and travellers
crossing the empire.15
Under Kanishka’s successors the Kushan hold over India lessened. They lost
all real authority in Afghanistan, eastern Persia and Central Asia when the new
powerful Sasanian dynasty, under Ardashir, seized power in Persia from the
Parthians in ad 226. From then on the Kushans became the minor vassals of
the new Persian Empire. In India too their authority increasingly came to be
challenged by the Western Shakas and by other minor independent principalities. By the end of the third century ad a variety of tribal republics and
monarchical states were reasserting themselves.
The Satavahanas of the Deccan: their prosperity and piety
The history of the lands of northern Andhra Pradesh, northern Karnataka and
Maharashtra is very much a part of the history of the Deccan, which, together
with the areas of the far south, makes up the great southern half of India. There
arose in two particular regions of the Deccan – in northwestern Maharashtra
and the Andhra region between the rivers Godavari and Krishna – a great
dynasty called Satavahana (sometimes known as the Andhra dynasty). These
regions had been part of the Mauryan Empire, so the dynasty arose either in the
very last years of the empire or shortly after its fall.16 The most famous of their
early kings was Satakarni,17 who ruled between about 37 and 27 bc. He is well
known in history for his successful campaigns against Kalinga and Malwa. He
gained Sanchi, the site of the great stupa, and an inscription from there refers
to him as Rajan Shri Satakarni.18 His conquest of the Godavari valley and the
southern regions gained him further power and status. After his reign the
Satavahana suffered a major defeat at the hands of the Western Shakas and lost
their hold on Maharashtra. As the Shaka satrapies denied the Satavahana access
to the western Deccan, the latter were thus forced to concentrate their energies
on the eastern Deccan. This situation lasted for about a century, but eventually
the Satavahanas turned the tables on the Shakas and reconquered their lost
territories. Many Shaka coins found in places such as Nasik in western
Maharashtra have their original Shaka images overstruck with those of the
returning Satavahana monarchs.19 Satavahana power reached its zenith during
the second century ad, in the reigns of Gautamiputra (113–38) and Pulumayi
II Vasisthiputra (138–70). By the time the kingdom perished in ad 236 it had
been in power for more than 300 years.
The basis of Satavahana prosperity lay in agriculture and trade. The
Satavahana kings were some of the greatest donors of land and land revenue to
communities of Buddhist monks, the brahmans, and to all who wished to
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 133
engage fruitfully in agricultural pursuits.20 Merchants and traders were equally
encouraged to open up new trade routes from the hinterland towards the ports.
This provided a further boost to the growth of urban centres in the Deccan as a
whole, but particularly the Andhra region.21 Part of the evidence for prosperity
is to be noticed in the man-made cave sites of northwest Maharashtra, which
were once the centres of Buddhist religious piety. The epigraphic inscriptions
retrieved from some of the caves provide us with details of religious charities
and endowments made not just by the prosperous merchants or local governing
elites but also by a whole variety of people belonging to various crafts and
professions. Buddhism was the inspiration behind the actions of these people.
Dotted all over the Satavahana Deccan were the great Buddhist monasteries
which had been established by pious endowments at the significant crossing
points of trading routes.22 Into these monasteries came people from all walks of
life, for peace and meditation and spiritual care, and bequeathed some of their
wealth as charity to support the further material needs of these institutions.
The Andhra merchants were some of the greatest donors. It is in this context of
prosperity and piety that we can best appreciate the glory that was the great
stupa of Amaravati, which no longer exists. This monumental structure, built
by an army of labourers, masons and craftsmen who lived in the great entrepôt
city of Dharanikota on the River Krishna,23 was a true symbol of Buddhist
piety and mercantile prosperity.
Gujarat and Malwa: the Western Shakas
Of the two Shaka branches mentioned above, the Western Shakas assumed
greater dominance. While the northern branch suffered a chequered history,
the western one endured until the rise of the Guptas in the fourth century ad.
24
It was under their powerful king Rudradaman I (c. ad 130–50) that they
tightened their grip on Gujarat, Malwa and Sind. Despite the overweening
power of the Satavahanas, Rudradaman found ways to co-exist with the Deccan
giant. His true fame lies in the fact that he has left behind, on a rock inscription
at Junagadh, a prasasti containing a most exquisite account of himself and of
his cultural achievements and acts of valour.25 Unlike the Ashokan edicts,
which use the Prakrit language, the Junagadh rock inscription is in Sanskrit,
which could be interpreted as Rudradaman’s way of showing respect to Brahmanic Vedic culture. It must have ensured his legitimacy as a ruler, despite his
Central Asian Shaka origins. The monarchs who followed Rudradaman were
people of lesser stature, but they nevertheless managed to maintain hold over
their territories in central India with determination and tenacity until both
the Kushans and the Satavahanas, their main rivals, had perished.
The international trade of India
The beginnings of India’s international trade can be noticed as early as 2500
bc, when the Harappan Civilisation traded goods with Mesopotamia and the
134 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
ports of the Persian Gulf. The Vedic Age is not noted for any large-scale external commercial contacts, but from 600 bc onwards, through a strong interaction with the Achaemenid Persians and the Graeco-Macedonians, a period of
great expansion in international commercial as well as cultural links set in.
The links became stronger during the Mauryan period, but the really significant
developments of that period were the growth in production of goods and the
setting up of a sound commercial infrastructure. The post-Mauryan era is
particularly well known for the range and volume of international trade that
was generated; and this trade, by both land and sea, added enormously to both
urban and rural prosperity. Practically no part of India was left untouched by
developments resulting from increased foreign trade. Whether one examines
the contents of The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, an ancient guidebook for
mariners, or the works of Roman historians or the Sangam literature of south
India, or studies the ground with archaeological skills, the subject of the
international trading connections of India assumes utmost importance for our
understanding of the period under review here.
The infrastructure
A vital aspect of the commercial infrastructure was the guild system. During
the post-Mauryan centuries the guilds came to play a crucial role in the success
of both domestic and international trade. Known in India as shreni, the guilds
can be described as associations of professional people, merchants or artisans.
They acted variously as trade unions, cooperative organisations, regulatory
bodies or even banks. They existed in various crafts and trades; there were, for
example, guilds of potters, goldsmiths, bead and glass makers, ivory carvers,
musicians and carpenters. The rules of work, the quality control over finished
goods, the fixing of prices, the recruitment of labour from a specific occupational
caste for a particular trade – these were all overseen by each craft guild.26 Rich
merchants and many ruling dynasties invested in the guilds, making them
viable and flourishing. The guilds, in turn, provided large donations to religious foundations and monasteries. The guilds of merchants, who were known
as shreshthins, acted also as bankers, financiers and trustees. Large sums were
loaned out, bearing interest rates of between 12 and 15 per cent, with higher
rates carried for the sea trade.27 Another aspect of the commercial infrastructure
was the great increase in the minting of coins during the post-Mauryan
centuries. For the numismatist, the best of the early coins of India were those
struck by the Indo-Greek kings and the Kushan monarchy. Through the
foreign influence of the Persians, the Greeks and the Romans, the quality of
Indian coins greatly improved over the older punch-marked coins. Made from
gold, silver, copper or tin, the variety of coins proved especially useful for
variant trading economies in different regions; and the huge quantity of local
and foreign coins also made it easier for merchants to engage in forward
speculation in goods and capital.
The links by road and river between the various main cities and trading
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 135
towns were an essential element in the general infrastructure facilitating the
volume of trade as a whole28 (see Map 7.2). Starting with the northwest, in the
centre of the Kushan territories, was Taxila, a city where the merchants of
Central and South Asia exchanged their goods and the intellectuals their ideas.
Taxila was joined to Pataliputra by a major highway; en route was Mathura,
which in turn was linked to Ujjain in the Malwa region, controlled by the
Western Shakas. Mathura and Ujjain linked the western Ganga valley and the
lands of central India. A number of market towns were also developed in
the Satavahana kingdom of the Deccan. Centres such as Nasik and Karad in
Maharashtra and Nagarjunakonda in the Andhra region were all important
trading centres where the farmers, pastoralists and hunter-gatherers from the
hinterland congregated to sell their commodities and wares. The routes linking
these places sometimes had to follow the gaps and breaks in mountains or the
river valleys. All the major routes led to the five main international ports of
that period, namely Barbaricum in the Indus delta, Barygaza on the Gujarat
coast, Muziris on the Kerala coast, Arikamedu on the Coromandel coast and
Tamralipti in the Ganges delta. These ports handled the bulk of the sea trade of
India with Arabia, the Levant, the Roman Empire and Southeast Asia.29
The overland trade route through the Kushan territories
Since at least 600 bc the main overland trade route had run from Taxila towards
West Asia and the Hellenistic world.30 Caravans from India carried ivory,
elephants, spices, cloths, salt, musk, saffron and indigo; the returning caravans
brought lapis lazuli, turquoise, fine quality ceramics, wines, and gold and
silver coins. The first part of the overland route was from Taxila to Begram,
from where two main routes branched out: the northern route via Bactria, the
Oxus, the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus to the Black sea, and the southern
route via Kandahar, Herat and Ecbatana to the ports of the eastern Mediterranean. Once the Kushans came to establish their trans-Oxus empire and
controlled all territory between the Aral Sea and the middle Ganga valley, a
new dimension was added to the overland trade route.31 This came to be in the
form of a link to the famous Silk Road that connected China with Europe by
land.32 The Silk Road began at Lo-yang in China, progressed through Chang’an
and reached Dun-huang on the eastern edge of the Taklamakan desert. From
there two routes branched, one north of the desert and the other south of it,
both reaching Kashgar on the western edge of the Taklamakan. From Kashgar
the Silk Road entered the Central Asian and Bactrian territories of the Kushans
before proceeding through the Parthian Empire towards Syria, the Levant and
eventually Constantinople. Through their Kushan connections, the merchants
of India could now begin to share in the handling of the products that travelled
along the Silk Road, particularly the silk from China. They first did this by
taking expensive gifts to the Chinese emperors.33 At the same time, during the
first and second centuries ad, Buddhist missionaries were making progress in
spreading the message of the Buddha among both the Central Asians and the
Map 7.2 Land and sea routes of ancient Indian international trade.
Taxila
Pataliputra
Barygaza Tamralipti
Turfan
Lo-yang
Chang’an
Dun-huang
Kashgar
Mathura
Constantinople
Ecbatana
Herat
Begram Yarkand
Khotan
Miran
Arikamedu
Maziris To Malacca Straits and China
To Persian Gulf
ports
To Egypt and
Rome
To China
SILK
ROAD
Kanadahar
1000 km
600 miles
Barbaricum
Kuchi
Quarashahr
Ujjain
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 137
Chinese; and, during the period when the Kushans were dominant, Indian
merchants and the Buddhist missionaries forged a powerful alliance of interests.
At various junctions on both the northern and southern routes of the Silk
Road, skirting the Taklamakan desert, at places such as Kashgar, Yarkand,
Khotan, Miran, Kuchi, Qurashahr and Turfan, Indian merchants set up their
colonies, while the missionaries established monasteries. As Buddhism spread
into China, the demand for Buddhist artefacts from India underwent a manifold
increase.34 During this time the Chinese emperors were becoming concerned
by the growing tensions between the Roman Empire and the Parthian Empire,
resulting in Parthian impediments to the movement of goods through their
territory.35 They were therefore more than content to entrust Indian merchants
with handling the silk destined for the Roman market, taking it via Taxila
whence it would be dispatched southwards to the ports of Barbaricum and
Barygaza, bypassing Parthian lands. Roman ships would then carry away the
silk and leave behind their products such as coral, glass, silver and topaz. These,
in turn, would also be handled by Indian merchants on their overland route to
China. The strategic location of the Kushan state between India and China
meant that the ruling nobility and the subsidiary elites were heavily involved
in this trade; they too wished to partake of the share of luxury goods. However,
they were not particularly interested in the handling of the trade itself; they
left that to individual merchants and, probably, to the specific merchant
guilds. Their benefits came in the form of imposts and levies that they charged
on all movement of goods through their territory.
India and Rome
With the founding of the Roman Empire in 31 bc, India and Rome began a
highly successful trading relationship that lasted for more than two centuries.
The main reason was the increasing prosperity of the Roman populace and
their insatiable demand for certain Indian products and those of China and
Southeast Asia, which could be easily procured for them by Indian merchants.
The annexation of Egypt by Rome in 31 bc was also a factor of great logistical
importance, because Rome became the mistress of both the Mediterranean Sea
and the Red Sea. The ports of the Red Sea, both on the Arabian and the
Egyptian–Ethiopian shores, had had trading relations with India for many
centuries, during the post-Alexandrine Hellenistic period and even earlier.36
Relatively small Egyptian, Arab, Greek and Indian ships used to ply between
those ports and the western Indian ones of Barbaricum, Barygaza and Muziris.
37
Until the first century ad foreign mariners, with perhaps the exception of the
Arabs of Yemen and Hadhramaut, did not fully understand the behaviour of
the Indian Ocean winds, which meant that destinations were reached after
prolonged detours by ships closely hugging the Arabian and Indian coastlines.
This changed after ad 45, when Hippalus, an Alexandrian, worked out the
pattern of seasonal winds (the monsoon), thereby helping his fellow seamen to
sail through the Arabian Sea during the right season and shortening their
138 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
journey time. The trade links with south India were to be particularly
strengthened by this development.
After 31 bc, the type of large vessels that used to carry Egyptian grain from
Alexandria to Rome began to be built along the Red Sea ports, in order to be
fitted out for trade voyages to India. They could be 180 feet in length and
weigh 1,000 tons.38 A large Roman ship, carrying from India compact and
costly merchandise of silks, fine cottons, pepper, costus, nard and spikenard,
and bringing to India products such as two-handled amphorae, fine ceramics,
bronze vases and delicate glassware, represented a ‘monumental investment’39
by many traders. As the captains of such ships did not normally sail to the east
coast ports of India, both import and export goods were loaded on to much
smaller Indian ships that continually plied between the two coasts. At
Arikamedu, for example, the foreign goods brought by these ships would be
unloaded, and valuable spice cargoes from both India and the Indonesian spice
islands, along with other Indian goods, would be loaded on to the same ships
bound for Muziris. This was the legendary entrepôt trade of south India.40
Generally speaking, the overall balance of trade between India and Rome was in
the favour of India, and the Romans had to pay for the deficits in the form of
bullion.41 A large hoard of Roman coins found at Arikamedu and other places in
South India, along with the archaeological remains of a Roman colony, testify
to the vigour of the Indo-Roman trade. Owing to the absence of local gold coins
in south India, the Roman gold and silver coins were also used as high-value
currency, which would have encouraged hoarding. Only a quarter of the amount
of good quality Roman coin hoards discovered in south India have been found
in north India: the Kushan state issued its own gold coins, as valuable in metal
terms as the Roman ones, and simply melted down the Roman coins for their
metal.42 Apart from coins, small hoards of other Roman goods, such as amphorae,
bronze vessels and finer quality ceramics and potsherds, have been recovered
from a variety of sites in western India, the Andhra region and the south. Much
research is also directed at studying whether the excellent Red Polished Ware
(RPW) pottery of western India43 or the rouletted ware of southeastern India
were imitations of Roman or Hellenistic potteries.44 Another interesting piece
of recent research concerns the role of the Indian venture capitalist in the
financing of Indo-Roman trade. Until recently, it was widely assumed that the
‘initiative of this long-distance sea-borne trade with west was taken by western
traders, while the role of India, steeped in agriculture, was only that of the
grower of some luxury and prestige commodities.’45 This view needs to be
revised in the light, firstly, of a recently discovered papyrus document detailing
a loan contract between an Indian and a Roman46 and, secondly, of the excavations in Egypt pointing to the presence there of Indian settlers and traders.47
New trends in Indian religions
A series of remarkable developments in the religious thinking of India took
place during the post-Mauryan era. They affected both Buddhism and Vedic
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 139
Brahmanism. Within both systems particular strands of theism – belief in the
existence of God with or without a belief in a special revelation – began to
develop, with profound consequences for many millions of people in the subcontinent and beyond.
Mahayana Buddhism
Buddhism was not just the ‘central public religion’48 of India; during our
period it was also assuming the status of a major world religion. A number of
royal dynasties became the patrons and guardians of the religion, as can be witnessed from impressive monuments and inscriptions left behind. The monarchs
of Central Asian origin were particularly attracted by its ‘catholicity’;49 and the
Kushan king Kanishka remains for the Buddhists even today the most
cherished of monarchs, second only to Ashoka. It was the agency of the Kushan
Empire that made possible the triangular commercial and cultural contacts
between India, China and Central Asia and facilitated the movement of
Buddhist ideas beyond the Pamirs and the Himalayas. Within India itself the
religion was becoming attractive to different cults and sects. As a result of both
domestic and foreign expansion and interactive encounters with beliefs inside
and outside India new ideas were bound to emerge. Over many centuries the
traditional Buddhist ideology had come to be crystallised into what was called
the ‘Three Jewels’: first, the lessons to be learned from the life of the Buddha,
the ‘one who knows’; second, the Dhamma, the ‘law of the cosmos . . . the law of
the mind, of the good life and of the spiritual path’;50 third, the austere and
puritanical life in a sangha, the monastic community. Now, in a period of new
social and historical realities, many Buddhist thinkers argued that the ‘Three
Jewels’ approach was much too intellectual and restrictive for the masses to
grasp. It was really a type of ‘icy idealism’,51 quite unsuited to the needs of
newer devotees subscribing to the Buddhist faith. While not repudiating the
core values of the Three Jewels, they argued that the Buddha could come to life
for the masses only when he was elevated to the status of a god. This deification
of the Buddha and the doctrine of salvation by faith were at variance with the
traditional teaching, because the Buddha had never claimed divine status.
Further, he had left the endeavour of achieving bliss, or nirvana, to each individual through a rational understanding of his ideas and methods expounded
in his Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path. The dissenters, however,
argued that an individual needed the intercession of divine beings, the
Bodhisattvas, who were born again and again on this earth because they were
prepared to forego their own nirvana in order to help ordinary mortals help
achieve theirs. The Bodhisattvas came to be arranged within the Buddhist
pantheon of semi-divinities, which suggests that this new variant of Buddhism
was attempting to become more attractive to local sects and cults by incorporating their gods and goddesses within the pantheon. It is also likely that
another new idea, that of a saviour to come – the Buddha Maitreya – might
have had its origins in the contacts between Buddhism and Zoroastrianism.
140 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
The latter is generally reckoned to be the first religion to develop the idea of a
saviour messiah – known as Saoshyant.
52 The cluster of such new ideas provoked
a split between the dissenters, who wanted a more inclusive and more faithbased Buddhism, to be known as Mahayana Buddhism, or the Great Vehicle,
and the traditional elders, the Theravadins, who clung on to the pristine purity
of ideas represented by the principle of the Three Jewels. A pejorative term,
Hinayana, or the Lesser Vehicle, came in due course to be applied to the
Theravadin school of thought. The final victory, ultimately, was that of the
Mahayanists; their brand of Buddhism remained dominant in India until the
twelfth century and, apart from Sri Lanka and Thailand, the vast majority of
the Buddhist world today is Mahayana-oriented.
Historians of religion have argued that much of the new thinking, particularly in the Mahayana tradition, was really like ‘old wine in new bottles’,
simply a reinterpretation of the traditional Buddhist viewpoints;53 but we still
need to recognise that there is a considerable literature in this period which
points to dynamic and radical departures in Buddhist thinking. Some of the
key Mahayana texts were formulated during the post-Mauryan centuries,54
although we are uncertain about their exact dates. One particularly interesting
text was the Milindapanha, the philosophical questions asked by the IndoGreek king Menander to the Buddhist philosopher Nagasena. In some of his
answers Nagasena laid great stress on the divinisation of the Buddha and the
importance of relic worship. Another text, the Buddhacharita, a biography of
the Buddha, composed by the renowned polymath Asvaghosha, also confirms
the Mahayanist image of a divine Buddha. From an older and more traditional
treatise, known as the Mahavastu, the Mahayanists adopted the particular styles
of Buddha-worship, with copious use being made of such precious materials as
gold, lapis lazuli, pearls, silver, silk, etc., as gifts for gaining merits and rewards
from the Buddha. This attitude embodied ‘the great influence of commerceoriented lay worshippers on Buddhism’55 and again demonstrated the importance of the overland trade between India and China. While the bulk of the
Theravadin texts are in the Pali language, the key works of the Mahayana
canon, made up of many different books used by different sects, were written
in Sanskrit; they are known collectively as the Vaipulyasutra. The most important Vaipulyasutra is the Saddharmapundarika (The Lotus Sutra), a Mahayana
text greatly revered in China and Japan. This text formulated the concept of
the Bodhisattvas and provides elaborate details of how stupas should be designed
and how the rituals of Buddha worship were to be conducted. Finally, there is
the Prajnaparamita, a Mahayana philosophical text, which lists the various
virtues necessary to attain the Buddha state.
Vaishnava and Shaiva traditions
The first manifestations of what we would now describe as popular Hinduism
began to emerge during the post-Mauryan centuries. For more than a thousand
years, until the sixth century bc, Vedic Brahmanism had been the principal
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 141
religion of India. The main elements of this religion, as we have noted earlier,
were the supremacy of the Vedas, the caste system, the sacrificial rituals for
propitiating the powerful Vedic elemental gods such as Indra, Surya, Rudra,
Varuna, Vayu, etc., and the monopolistic role of the brahman priests in the
performance of all ceremonies. From the sixth century bc onwards Buddhism,
Jainism and various heterodox forms of Shramanism launched a challenge to
Vedic Brahmanism and gained a relatively large number of adherents. Buddhism particularly secured a powerful ascendancy during both the Mauryan and
the post-Mauryan periods. However, during the post-Mauryan age, there came
a certain backlash in favour of Vedic Brahmanism at some of the royal courts.
What also took place was the beginning of a modified form of Vedic Brahmanism. Two very strongly theistic traditions blossomed at this time, which we
call the Vaishnava and the Shaiva. They centred round three main concepts:
that of a supreme deity in the form of Vishnu or Shiva; that of salvation being
made possible through the supreme deity’s grace; and that of attainment of
that salvation by the means of intense love and devotion to the deity, the
process known as bhakti. The two traditions did not break away from Vedic
Brahmanism, but rejected some of the practices such as animal sacrifices. The
Vaishnava form of worship at first focused on three older deities: Vasudeva, a
tribal deity; Krishna, the deity of the Yadava clan; and Narayana, referred to as
a deity in the Satapatha Brahmana.
56 All three deities eventually became
identified with Vishnu, originally a Vedic god of lesser importance but now
assuming a much greater status in the eyes of its followers.57 The major strand
in Vaishnavism came through those with the Vasudeva–Krishna connections,
known as the bhagvatas.
58 Their intensely concentrated devotion to a personal
lord, Bhagavana, attracted even some non-Indians. Their greatest spiritual and
intellectual legacy to us is the world famous short dialogue between Krishna,
an incarnation of Vishnu, and Arjuna, one of the five Pandava brothers, in the
Mahabharata. Refuting such practices as withdrawal, renunciation and idle
sentimentalism, Krishna enjoins Arjuna to focus his devotion upon him and
fulfil his duty according to his place in society, however hard that struggle
may be.
The Shaiva tradition rests upon the ancient deity of Shiva and upon the
Mother Goddess Shakti, Shiva’s consort. Shiva has an ancient pedigree in
Brahmanic mythology. Some scholars have also traced this deity to the
Harappan culture ‘Pashupati’ seal that shows a seated horned proto-Shiva
figure surrounded by animals, but this is now strongly challenged by others.
More convincingly, Shiva was the original god Rudra in the Vedas, a god who
represented destructive and malignant forces of nature.59 Rudra was known as
the ‘Roarer’, but, like Vishnu, he too had been a marginal god in the first
instance. However, from the time when he was elevated to a supreme force in
one of the Upanishads, Shiva has been venerated by millions in India. During
the period under review a definite Shaiva tradition emerged through the
activities of sects such as Lakulin, Pashupata or Maheshvara.60 Their intense
devotion to Shiva was also emulated by great rulers such as Vima Kadphises of
142 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
the Kushans, who ordered the depiction of the Shiva on his coins. The lingam
that replaced the Shiva image in due course has been the core of intense
devotion by the Shaivites throughout India.
The Dharmashastra of Manu
While Vaishnavism and Shaivism may have helped to access the Vedic religion
to greater numbers of people, the Brahmanic thinkers nevertheless continued
to reaffirm the principles of Vedic orthodoxy in much of the commentatorial
literature that developed during this period. This literature was part of the
great Smriti corpus that began with the composition of Sutras in the late Vedic
and post-Vedic periods. It deals with a host of issues in society and life
generally, with lessons and implications drawn from the Sruti literature. The
particular component that we call the Dharmashastras were essentially
normative texts dealing with Dharma, ‘the whole system of Law, moral and
legal, that has its foundation in the transcendent order, and the specific systems
of rules and regulations under which a given individual lives.’61 In all, nineteen
Dharmashastras, attributed to ancient seers, have been identified,62 but just
four of them form the essential core. They are Manavdharmashastra, or Manusmriti, Yajnavalkyasmriti, Naradasmriti (see Extract 7.1) and Parasarasmriti,
attributed to sages Manu, Yajnavalkya, Narada and Parasara. The Manusmriti
is the critical text for our period: it might have been composed any time
between 200 bc and ad 200; the other three are later compositions, falling
outside our period. Highly prescriptive and rigid in its thinking, the
Manusmriti became the rule book for orthodox brahmans. Its contents, consisting
of 2,684 verses divided into twelve chapters, among other things, affirm the
divine right of kings; confirm and rationalise the theory of the caste system;
elaborate upon and sing praises of the so-called four stages of life for Vedic
followers; and express grave reservations about the constancy and capabilities
of women.63 The text was never universally followed or acclaimed by the vast
majority of Indians in their history: it came to the world’s attention through a
late eighteenth-century translation by Sir William Jones, who mistakenly
exaggerated both its antiquity and its importance. Today many of its ideas are
popularised as the golden norm of classical Hindu law by Hindu universalists.
They are, however, anthema to modern thinkers and particularly feminists. On
caste, the Manusmriti emphasises the dignity of the brahman and casts grave
aspersions over the shudras. At the same time, it does take notice of the fact that
greater social fluidity could arise out of the union of sexes from different castes
and the formation of new castes resulting therefrom. The great twentiethcentury leader of the ‘untouchable’ communities, Dr Ambedkar, had little
time and low regard for this text and condemned it outright, with much good
reason.64 On Christmas Day 1927, he and his followers burned copies of it in
public.65 While Westernised feminists feel highly affronted by the strictures
on women, there may be something to be said in mitigation of the Manusmriti’s
position. Manu wishes nothing but honour and respect to be shown to women,
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 143
but does not believe that they deserve many freedoms. According to one
empathetic writer, ‘this contradiction is more apparent than real . . . for the
emphasis is not so much on the denial of any freedom to a woman as on the
duty of her near ones to protect her at all costs.’66 Although paternalistic and
patronising, Manu’s views are not entirely at odds with views on women held
by both men and women not just in India but also in many parts of the nonWestern world. Western feminism comes quite a way behind Western science
and technology among their priorities.
Secular literature, sciences and the arts
A florescence of cultural creativity is distinctly noticeable during the postMauryan centuries. This creativity was partly an expression of the efforts and
genius of the Indian people themselves, and partly the result of crossfertilisation of ideas from different traditions and cultures. The fusion of native
ideas and skills with those borrowed from Persian, Greek, Central Asian or
Chinese sources gave a sharper impetus and edge to all cultural products
created in India at that time. In due course, the outside world came to admire
some of these products. The developments in literature, sciences and the arts
will furnish us with appropriate examples of progressive creativity.
Sanskrit literature
Sanskrit was the hallowed language in which the most sacred of India’s literature had been composed. Although during the age of the Buddha and under
the Mauryan Empire various forms of Prakrit – the popular languages – came
into prominence, Sanskrit always remained the language that wielded a pervasive influence. Far from being hostile to Sanskrit, the post-Mauryan monarchs,
whether Indian or foreign, also provided valuable patronage; and even much of
the literature of Mahayana Buddhism was written in Sanskrit. The most
famous Buddhist writer in Sanskrit was Asvaghosha, whose life of the Buddha,
the Buddhacharita, was an early gem of Sanskrit biographical literature and
‘a work of art’.67 In fact, during the post-Mauryan period, Sanskrit came to be
recognised as the language of the educated and cultured classes, irrespective of
their religion. It was the quality of language and its subtle use that preoccupied
such people. The Buddhacharita, along with another acclaimed work, the
Mahabhashya, by Patanjali the grammarian,68 was admired as a fine example of
Sanskrit prose literature. However, the most significant of literary developments in Sanskrit came to be expressed through poetry and drama. The poetic
genre was the kavya, or court poetry. This poetry, in the form of either a grand
narrative poem or a short lyric, described vividly such themes as nature, a love
scene, a spectacle or praise for the monarch. This last function was particularly
sought after by monarchs with an eye to their place in history. Thus, in the
famous prasasti of Rudradaman, inscribed on a rock in Junagadh, referred to
earlier, the king’s praises are sung by the poet using various figures of speech
144 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
and alliteration.69 The kavya has exercised a major influence on the Indian
poetic tradition generally for more than a thousand years. Parallel to it was the
rise of the secular drama, the natya. The Indian drama tradition harked back to
Vedic times and all early dramas were based on religious themes. In the new
Sanskrit drama, however, the issues of morality or conduct in society were
explored in plots around a hero or a heroic figure, with much use of sentiment,
romance, satire or farce. They were to be more appealing to varied audiences.
In the next chapter we shall refer to the contributions of India’s greatest dramatist, Kalidasa; but, during our period, a most amazing textbook of dramatic
criticism was produced by someone called Bharata. We know very little about
him personally, but his work, the Natyashastra, rediscovered as late as the nineteenth century, is now considered a most compact compendium of dramaturgy,
theatre, acting, costumes, make-up, dance, audience participation and theatre
architecture, with pertinent advice and instruction for actors, producers and
playwrights. The appropriate use of words, mimicry, gesture and posture are
all, according to Bharata, necessary for the success in the performing arts, and
it is only through this success that the audience’s appreciation, or what is
known as rasa, can be aroused70 (see Extract 7.2). This notion of rasa (literally
‘flavour’, ‘taste’) has remained ‘the most important and influential single
concept of Indian criticism to this day’.71
Tamil literature
The Aryanisation of the Dravidian-speaking peoples during the first millennium bc had involved an increasing use of Sanskrit in the south. The Sanskritic
influence is strongest in three of the southern languages: Telugu, Kannada and
Malayalam. Tamil, the principal and the most ancient of the Dravidian literary
languages, was also influenced by Sanskrit, but on a far smaller scale. It retained
its independence and originality, particularly in its technical structure. A
fuller appreciation of the political, social and cultural development of the far
south can be gained only by studying the most ancient of the Tamil texts.
Tamils dominated the early history of the region, and one of their major
intellectual traditions was the regular gathering of a large number of poets in a
sangam, or an academy, at which poems and stories were recited. The so-called
Sangam Age lasted from approximately 500 bc to ad 500.72 Three sangams
were held, but the works from the first two are difficult to trace. An important
grammatical work of the second sangam, known as Tolkappiyam, is an exception.
It gives us, among other things, information concerning the ecology and the
environment of the far south, expressed in a particular concept of a geographical
habitat, known as tinai. A number of habitats are identified: high lands, forests,
pastures, dry lands, river valleys or coastal lands. The Tolkappiyam tells us
about the people who lived in these locales, their relationship with nature and
between themselves, and their varied customs.73 The differences, for example,
in the lifestyles of people who lived in the forests and those of the river valleys
are brought out by describing how large-scale cattle raids by the former on the
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 145
lands of the pastoral people were carried out.74 It is from the third sangam that
the bulk of our literary heritage in Tamil can be drawn. Three major anthologies
cover the works from this sangam. They are Patthuppattu (Ten Idylls, or short
pastoral poems), Ettuthokai (Eight Collections) and Padinenkilkanakku
(Eighteen Poems). Two of the Eight Collections of Ettuthokai are particularly
valuable. One is the Purananaru, which contains descriptions of the life of the
southern people in that period; and the other is Kurunthokai (c. ad 100)
consisting of 400 verses of short love poems, between four and nine lines long,
composed by 205 poets.75 Among the Eighteen Poems of the Padinenkilkanakku,
the eleventh, the Kural, laid out in 113 sections of ten couplets each, presents
in verses a guide to the art of good living. The varieties of sangam collections
also enable us to understand the differences among the people of the south.
Although there was much inequality between the castes and great poverty
among the lower ranked, the overall impression one has of the south is that it
was suffused by a relatively peaceful and relaxed communal atmosphere. The
most convincing evidence for this lies in the greater freedoms enjoyed by the
female sex.
Advance in sciences
Astronomy and medicine were two of the main sciences in which steady progress was made during our period.76 Indian interest in astronomy dated from
the earliest of Vedic times, and much astronomical knowledge can be gathered
from the Samhitas, the Brahmanas and Sutra literature. Many reflections and
speculations about the sun, the moon, the earth, the planets or the eclipses
were interspersed with calculations of the division of time in terms of a day, a
month, seasons, solstices, equinoxes and calendars in general. Religious preoccupation and mystical interpretations, however, dominated the astronomical
thinking during those centuries. It was with the beginning of the Christian era
that a new turning point was reached, with a greater emphasis on a rigorous
scientific method of inquiry and interpretation. There also came into use a
more sophisticated system of computation, with mathematical concepts such
as the integral solutions of indeterminate equations and trigonometry. The
positions of the various planets were charted with greater precision, and more
accurate calculations of the length of the year or of the day were recorded. The
relevant literature for this information consists of a set of siddhantas, or the socalled final solutions, each ascribed to a particular astronomer-sage. It is
believed that there were originally eighteen such siddhantas, but only five of
them, codified in the sixth century by the great astronomer Varahamihira, are
now available to us. The names of two of them, the Romaka Siddhanta and the
Paulisa Siddhanta, give strong hints of the Greek and classical influences on
Indian astronomy. This is a subject of intense debate, but common sense suggests that the strong commercial links of India must also have had their parallel
in cultural links.77
Ayur-Veda, the ancient medical system of India, is today considered as one of
146 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
the important branches of complementary medicine. Its relative popularity
throughout the world is because of its emphasis on a more holistic approach by
the physician towards illness in general (see Extract 7.3). The bulk of our
knowledge of the system is drawn from the works of Charaka and Susruta, who
belonged to this period. Their works constitute the standard material of AyurVeda, and have been handed down to us over the centuries in various revisions.
They describe and explain fully eight branches of medical knowledge and
practice: therapeutics, surgery, diseases of the sensory organs, mental illness,
infant disorders, toxicology, tonics/drugs and sexual virility. The materia
medica of Ayur-Veda was also extensive, with a variety of substances drawn
from the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms. As with astronomy, there is
debate among historians whether India contributed at all to the Greek and
Hellenistic medical systems, or whether these developed independently. On
balance, there is a greater likelihood of fairly strong Indian influences, in the
light of the testimony from Alexander the Great’s contemporaries, the accounts
of Megasthenes, the export of valuable medicinal plants from India to the
Mediterranean lands, and the generally more articulate and clearer instructions
in Indian medical texts compared with the Greek.
Architecture and sculpture
Despite the political confusion of the post-Mauryan era, the arts developed to a
remarkable degree. The stupa became the symbol of post-Mauryan architectural
progress. The archetype at Sanchi is the most famous of all these structures in
India, and the entire range of developments in the evolution of the stupa can be
found there (see Figure 7.1). Under the Shungas the stupa of Sanchi was greatly
enlarged and a terrace built around it. A stone vedika, or railing, encircled both
the stupa and its terrace. Under the Satavahanas beautifully carved toranas (i.e.
arched doorways) were erected, one at each of the cardinal points of the vedika.
The art of the sculpture also took off during this confusing period. There is
abundant sculptural material to analyse on the stone vedikas and toranas of the
Sanchi stupa no. 2, Bharhut (Gajjar) (see Figures 7.2, 7.3), and the Bodhgaya
Figure 7.1 Relief from a Sanchi gateway (from Havell, op. cit., plate VD, p. 32).
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 147
stupas. Three types of relief sculpture have been studied in great detail.78 One
is the vegetation design, consisting of lotus flowers on winding stems, trees
and garlands of flowers. Another consists of individual figures, such as yaksha
and yakshi (male and female semi-divine beings and life spirits) (see Figure
7.4), deities such as Indra, or soldiers. The most interesting reliefs are those of
narrative tableaux depicting various scenes from the Buddha’s life, such as the
dream of Maya Devi, Buddha’s mother, the purchase of the Jetavana Park or
Buddha’s descent from Trayatrimsa, and the Jataka legends. The sculptures of
the great stupa of Amaravati are also another great artistic heritage we have
received from the Satavahanas (see Extract 7.4).
Figure 7.2 A hip girdle from Bharhut Stupa (private photo, after Philip Rawson,
 op. cit., p. 132, by permission).
148 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
Indian art flowered during the Kushana era, with sculpture leading all other
arts. The sculptures of the Buddha were most common (see Figure 7.5). Two
major schools produced works of great excellence and beauty.79 The Gandhara
school of art was the more cosmopolitan of the two.80 The sculptures of this
school consist principally of the Buddha and the Boddhisatva figures that show
strong Greek and Roman artistic influences on Indian themes. Some of the
finest examples of Gandhara art are to be found in the British Museum,
Peshawar Museum, Berlin Museum and Indian Museum at Calcutta. The
second of the two schools was the Mathura school of art.81 During the first
three centuries of the Christian era Mathura, 50 miles southeast of Delhi on
the Yamuna river, was a great hub of cultural activity. In contrast to the
Gandhara school, a more authentically Indian artistic influence is stamped all
over the art of Mathura. A whole variety of Buddha statues, in different poses
and postures, all carved in the red spotted sandstone, are the distinguishing
feature of this school. The portrait sculpture of rulers is also a hallmark of this
style, the most famous of which is the statue of Kanishka himself. Power and
authority radiate from this statue, even though its head and arms are missing
(see Figure 7.6).
Figure 7.3 A rider on the Bharhut Stupa (Pat
 Baker: line drawing adapted from
 a photo in Rawson, op. cit., p. 59).
Figure 7.4 A yakshi (Pat Baker: line
 drawing adapted from a
 photo in Rawson, op. cit.,
 p. 67).
Figure 7.5 Buddhas in different art styles (Pat Baker: line drawings from photos in
 Rawson, op. cit., pp. 100–01).
Figure 7.6 Torso of King Kanishka (Pat Baker: line drawing from Rawson, op. cit.,
 p. 143).
150 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 7.1 Wealth and morality as explained in
Naradasmriti
The Naradasmriti is one of the great Dharmashastras of the Gupta period.
Like most Dharmashastras it throws much light on Hindu civil and
religious law. In the following passage it explains the degree of morality
behind the acquisition of wealth.
Wealth is of three kinds: white, spotted and black . . . White wealth is
acquired by sacred knowledge, valour in arms, the practice of austerities, . . . by instructing apupil, by sacrificing and by inheritance.
Spotted wealth is acquired by lending money at interest, tillage, . . .
by artistic performance, by servile attendance, or as a return for benefit
conferred on someone.
Black wealth is acquired as a bribe, by gambling, . . . by forgery, by
robbery, by fraud.
Source: Naradasmriti, I, 44–8, trans. Julius Jolly, in Max Muller (ed.),
Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 33, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1889, pp. 53–4.
Extract 7.2 Four millennia of musical ancestry
In the following passage a practitioner of Indian classical music explains
the development of this ancient art form.
According to Bharat every artist should create a Rasa or a mood. His
nine Rasas are wonder, terror, disgust, joy, pathos, anger, love,
serenity and valour. It has been said that western music describes a
mood, but Indian music creates it. A Raag is a series of five or more
notes on which a melody is based. Raag Basant creates joy and Raag
Todi grief. Even the drum beats are used to produce a mood, e.g., the
6-beat Dadra inspires a romantic mood, while the 14-beat Dhamar
creates a vigorous mood.
The whole tradition of Indian classical music has, in fact, its roots in
the Hindu religion. Originally the Vedas were recited, but later they
came to be chanted in three musical notes. Samveda developed to a
scale of seven notes: Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni [the Western major
scale C–D–E–F–G–A–B]. These are compared to the cry of the peacock and the calls of the chataka bird, the goat, the crane, the cuckoo,
the frog and the elephant respectively. They are said to be always of
the same pitch. Later on, four flats Re, Ga, Dha, Ni and one sharp Ma
Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas 151
were added. These twelve notes are common to both Indian and
western music, but ten more notes (micro-tones) are also used in
Indian music. By the end of 1000 bc the Samveda came to be sung to
the scale of what we now call Raag Bageshree.
In the caste system the sub-castes produced hereditary guilds, known
as Gharanas. Many Raags are produced in a variety of form, style and
presentation by the Gharanas.
For further understanding, read A.H. Fox Strangways, The Music of
Hindostan, New Delhi: Oriental Books, 1975; B. Chaitanya Deva, Indian
Music, New Delhi: Indian Council for Cultural Relations, 1974; Reginald
Massey and Jamila Massey, The Music of India, London: Kahn & Averill,
1986; (and in Marathi) Pandit Arvind Gajendragadkar, Sangeet Shastrache
Guide, Pune: Mrs. K. Nitin Gogate, 1991.
Source: From a note sent to the author by Dr Mahesh Godbole, Secretary
of the Indian Classical Music Society in northwest England.
Extract 7.3 Some simple advice regarding personal health
A Tamil poem of the Sangam Age (over 1,500 years ago) gives advice on
the problem of overindulgence in eating, causing much suffering to the
indulgent.
No need of medicine to heal your body’s pain,
 if what you ate before digested well, you eat again.
Who has a body gained may long the gift retain,
 if, food digested well, in measure due he eat again.
Knowing the food digested well, when hunger prompteth thee,
 with constant care, the viands choose that well agree.
With self-denial take the well-selected meal;
 so shall thy frame no sickness feel.
On modest temperance as pleasures pure,
 so pain attends the greedy epicure.
Who largely feeds, nor measure of the fire within maintains,
 that thoughtless man shall feel unmeasured pains.
Source: The ‘Sacred’ Kurral of Tiruvalluva-Nayanar, trans. G.U. Pope,
London: W.H. Allen, 1886, pp. 128–9.
Extract 7.4 The Amaravati sculptures
A priceless collection of 133 pieces of Indian sculpture from the Satavahana era has been exhibited at the British Museum since 1880. The
152 Diffusion and dynamism after the Mauryas
sculptures are from the site of the Mahachaitya, or the great stupa of
Amaravati, located in the lower reaches of the River Krishna in Andhra
Pradesh. It was in 1816 when Colonel Colin Mackenzie, later surveyor
general of India, and his staff recorded the contents and made the
drawings, all of which are preserved at the India Office of the British
Library. By 1880 the British Museum came to possess the larger portion
of the collection, with the rest being held by the Madras Museum. The
sculptures not only tell us the story of the Buddha’s life, using a variety
of Buddhist iconography and imagery, but they also depict the social
scenes in a typically busy Indian setting. The crowds of labourers and
masons and the performances of musicians and dancers are detailed, with
a lively imagination, alongside men on horses, chariots and bullock carts.

In the fourth and the fifth centuries of the Christian era most of north India
was ruled by monarchs of the Gupta dynasty (see Map 8.1), originally the
controllers of a minor principality in the western Ganga plains. The Gupta
family’s fortunes rose when its third king, Chandragupta I, extended his realms
into Magadha itself in ad 320. His acceptance among the kings and princes of
the eastern Ganga basin was confirmed after he married into the Lichchhavi
family, an influential republican clan on the borders of Bihar and Nepal. With
Chandragupta’s steady consolidation of his hold over the Magadhan heartland
the Gupta principality expanded into the Gupta kingdom, and under his son
and grandson the Guptas became a formidable power in north India. The
extent of their lands was smaller than that of the Mauryan or future Mughal
territories; nonetheless the Guptas ruled over what was essentially an empire
of great majesty and consequence. Another astute marriage extended their influence further south. There ruled in the Deccan the dynasty of the Vakatakas, who
had been the successors of the Satavahanas, and a politically crucial marriage
alliance between a Gupta princess and the Vakataka king in the late fourth
century brought the two families closer. Although the Gupta remained the
senior partners, the fifth century may rightly be described as the Gupta–
Vakataka Age. By the early sixth century the glory of both had faded, but a
number of minor Gupta kings carried on ruling ever smaller territories right
until the eighth century. We must distinguish these later, lesser, Guptas from
the earlier powerful ones who are often called the imperial Guptas.
A number of early Gupta emperors of outstanding character and ability
gave India two centuries of unprecedented stability. Despite much internal
warfare in the early years and external threats in the last decades of the fifth
century, they created a framework of peace and order for their empire that
heralded much fruitful progress and activity. The beneficial effects of their
benign rule and of their later subordinate partners, the Vakatakas, can be
evidenced from the many achievements of that era in the varied areas of life,
whether political, military, economic, social or cultural in nature. Those searching for an idyllic Hindu past of India have tended to glorify the Gupta times as
the ‘Golden Age’ of Indian history; but there are also some who have been stern
critics of such historical nostalgia.1
 Undoubtedly Gupta India was a far more
156 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
desirable and creative place in which to live than the other great civilisations of
that era, whether European, Chinese or Persian; but we must be careful that we
do not succumb to the exaggerated notion that it was an age of well-being for
all northern India’s people. We need to ask critically who benefited most and
who did not. Among the former were those who were most able to seize the
opportunities provided by stable conditions. They were either the elites of the
upper and upper middle classes of the caste pyramid or creative and gifted
people. As far as the ordinary people were concerned, the reality was somewhat
different. The vast majority of them lived a short life, economically precarious,
and disadvantaged by social, cultural and gender inequalities. Part of the
200 miles
300 km
Key
Conquests of Samudragupta
Conquests of Chandragupta II
TRIBUTARY NEPAL
AREAS
VAKATAKA
KINGDOM
SRI
LANKA
Core Gupta lands
under Chandra Gupta I
Map 8.1 Increase in Gupta territories.
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 157
explanation for the naïve perception of the Gupta era lies in certain assumptions
that are sometimes made about the post-Gupta period. These assumptions are
about the consequences of regionalised and feudal politics in this period, the
most negative of which is considered to be the ultimate inability of the Hindu
rulers to contain the steady inroad of Muslim forces into India from theeleventh
century onwards. The last three or four centuries of the first millennium ad are
therefore viewed as a period of retrogression, rather than deserving to be
studied and appreciated in their own context.2
The empire and the emperors
The imperial Guptas rightly begin with Chandragupta I, because it was he
who was honoured with the title of Maharajadhiraja, King over Kings, whereas
his father, Sri Ghatotkachagupta, and his grandfather, Sri Gupta, had carried
only the title of Maharaja.
3
 Chandragupta I’s work in expanding the Gupta
domain continued under his four successors, between 335 and 467. The
prestige and reputation of the Guptas stood highest during these 132 years.
The next eight decades saw a gradual decline in their fortunes as they faced
both internal dissension and foreign invasions. The final disintegration was
accompanied by the encroachment of minor tributaries and rulers on traditional
Gupta-controlled lands.
Two great Guptas (335–415)
Among the many monarchs who ruled in South Asia until the end of the third
century of the Christian era the names and reputations of three have withstood
the test of time: Chandragupta Maurya (321 bc–298 bc), the founder of the
Mauryan Empire; his grandson, Ashoka (272 bc–232 bc), who promulgated
the law of Dhamma in that empire; and Kanishka (c. first–second century ad),
the great Kushan king. To these three we must now add the names of two
remarkable Guptas – Samudragupta and Chandragupta II – who were the best
and the most sagacious of them. Their achievements define the political and
social tone of India during the heyday of their rule. Samudragupta (ad 335–
75) made the dynasty truly imperial. His strength and wisdom have generally
been admired, but we have more definite information about him from the
inscription carved on an Ashokan pillar that used to be at Kausambi but which
is now in Allahabad.4
 This so-called Allahabad pillar lists, at length, different
classes of kings subdued by Samudragupta: there were kings who were slain
and their territories annexed, but there were also defeated kings who were
released by the grace of Samudragupta in return for tribute, provision of military help, loyalty, granting of their daughters in marriage, etc. Frontier kings
paid homage to Samudragupta and distant kings sent embassies acknowledging
his suzerainty. The Gupta domain extended all the way up to the foothills of
the Himalayas, ranging over the eastern Deccan and a long stretch of the
eastern coastline. Samudragupta’s defeat of fourteen kings of south India and
158 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
his several victories led the historian Vincent Smith to describe him as the
Napoleon of ancient India.5
 Unlike Napoleon, however, Samudragupta never
met his Waterloo, because he refused to overextend himself. In that he showed
the wisdom common to many Indian rulers. Great as were his military skills,
Samudragupta was also a poet, a musician and an intellectual personality. He
was honoured as a poet-king, or kaviraja, and he gathered about him a galaxy
of poets and scholars, promoting high culture at his court. Though a Vaishnavite,6
 he showed much liberality of outlook in employing Buddhist advisers
such as Vasubandhu. When Meghavarman, king of Sri Lanka (c. ad 350–80),
sent a request for help in building a monastery at Bodh Gaya for visiting Sri
Lankan monks and scholars, Samudragupta generously donated towards the
construction of a building which eventually housed 1,000 of them.7
Under Samudragupta’s son, Chandragupta II (375–415), the Gupta state
became more powerful and prosperous. A spectacular conquest and a strategic
matrimonial alliance were key factors. The conquest was that of the Shakas of
western India. The Shakas, or the Scythians, as will be recalled, had moved into
India after the collapse of the Mauryans, but by the fourth century their main
power base in India was in Malwa and Saurashtra, with their capital at Ujjain.
Their defeat at the hands of Chandragupta II opened the way to the Gupta
control of key ports in western India, such as Broach, Cambay and Sopara,
which produced greater revenues from their overseas trade.8
 The possession of
Ujjain led to dominance over the internal trade routes that crossed through
that great central Indian city. After his conquest of the Shakas, Chandragupta
II came to be known as Vikramaditya, or ‘Sun of Valour’, a title highly esteemed
in Brahmanic India. Like his grandfather, Chandragupta II was shrewd enough
to understand the value of marriage alliances for enhancing the influence and
dignity of his own dynasty. He himself married Kuvera-Naga, a princess from
the Naga family, and thus extended his patrimony.9
 More importantly, however, he married his daughter Prabhavatigupta to King Rudrasena II of the
Vakataka dynasty of Maharashtra and the western Deccan. When Rudrasena II
died prematurely, Prabhavatigupta ruled as regent for her minor sons, thereby
bringing the Vakatakas under Gupta influence.10 The strength and prosperity
of Chandragupta II’s empire are reflected in fine gold and silver coins issued
during his reign. The coins united the emperors with their far-flung subjects.
Chandragupta II was also a renowned patron of art and culture. He held three
courts – at Pataliputra, Ayodhya and Ujjain, but the one at Ujjain was particularly lustrous. It was a court where a circle of poets, commonly known as the
‘Nine Gems’, is said to have flourished under the patronage of Chandragupta
and composed verses in his praise. The most famous of the gems was Kalidasa,
the great dramatist and poet.11
Decentralisation and devolution of power
The honorific titles bestowed upon the Gupta emperors leave no doubt as to
their belief in the Brahmanic notions of kingship.12 The king’s right was
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 159
divinely ordained and was sanctified by the ceremonies that the brahmans
performed on his behalf; but his right was only valid as long as he followed a
righteous policy towards all his subjects. As the Markandeya Purana puts it, ‘a
king inaugurated in his kingdom must in the first place conciliate his subjects,
without obstructing his own duty.’13 The Gupta emperors kept to the letter
and spirit of this understanding.14 Instead of governing by absolutist principle,
they followed the rajadharma, the duty of kings to protect their subjects and
to arbitrate in disputes. They also initiated certain changes in the very style
of exercise of monarchical authority. For nearly a thousand years the Indian
monarchs, whether imperial or regional, had aimed at a concentration of all
power in their hands. Absolutist rulers were tempted to subdue provinces and
regions to their will through their bureaucracies; and the Mauryans were
perhaps the greatest of centralisers. The Gupta dominions were organised on a
somewhat different model, the main difference being the principle of decentralised administration.15 The Guptas consciously devolved power on a variety of
people and authorities who were then brought together in a circle of friendship
and homage. Instead of bolstering a bureaucratic hierarchy, they helped to
develop political hierarchies. This trend could be noticed in the power structures operating in the centuries immediately after the Mauryas, but the Guptas
developed it further. To appreciate this model of decentralisation more fully it
is necessary to peruse carefully the deeds of Samudragupta as narrated in the
inscription of the Allahabad pillar. Samudragupta did not wish to vanquish his
enemies merely for his own gratification. After defeating them he permitted
most of them to keep their domains within the empire. They were to be protected by him, while he would share in their wealth. What he was developing
was a form of contract between the tributary kings and himself as the overlord.
This arrangement did not work for the weaker Gupta emperors of the sixth
century, but during the heyday of Gupta power in the fourth and fifth centuries
it functioned extremely well and helped to keep peace among the various
ruling families. The post-Gupta rulers in future centuries would also, in
measure of their capabilities, adopt the model of tributary rulership. Indeed, in
one sense, it would be true to say that the model operated right until the end of
British rule in India. After the great rebellion of 1857 the British realised that
it was far better to make friends of the remaining princes of India than to
subjugate them and alienate them further. They were simply following the
Samudragupta principle of a network of what were called samantas. Over
centuries the Sanskrit word samanta, literally meaning neighbour, has undergone many changes in its political significance; but during the Gupta period
a samanta was coming to mean a neighbouring subsidiary ruler who was a
friendly tributary of the Gupta sovereigns.
Imperial organisation
The Guptas avoided an overelaborate bureaucracy. Part of the reason for this
was the decentralisation of administrative authority accompanied by land
160 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
grants, carrying varied immunities and concessions, to persons and institutions.
State rule was lightly exercised. At the royal palace in Pataliputra the monarch
was advised by a council of ministers, led by the Pradhana Mantry, the chief
minister. He headed the civil administration, but a good number of other
ministers and high officials had duties related to military matters. Thus there
was the minister of peace and war, the chief of police, the commander-in-chief,
the chief of the palace guards, the chief of cavalry and the chief of the elephant
corps. This emphasis on defence and security naturally reflected the essential
concern of the central government: the maintenance of state power and the
security of the people.16 In the central secretariat each office had its own seal
with which its communications were stamped for authentication. The second
layer of administration dealt with the provinces, which were called bhukti or
desa. A class of officers known as kumaramatyas headed the provincial councils.17
The district, generally called pradesha or vishaya, and its council, headed by
another group of officers, the ayuktakas or vishayapatis, were the concern of a
third layer of administration. In the fourth layer were grouped the villages and
towns. For each village there was a village assembly consisting of village elders,
guided by a village headman.18 In the towns there were city corporations,
headed by a chairman, the nagarashreshthin, which consisted of many representatives of guild merchants.19 In most town corporations there was the office
of the chief scribe.20 All substantive decisions, affecting each town or village,
were taken at the local level, reflecting the decentralising policies of the state.
We do not have any evidence of voting procedures, but there can be no doubt
that decisions would have been arrived at after robust discussion, in the true
Indian fashion. The kumaramatyas and the ayuktakas functioned as serving
intermediaries between the centre and the periphery. This model of organisation
was replicated in many of the lands of the samantas. In addition to peace with
the samantas, the Gupta policy of general devolution of power helped, in the
long run, to create layers of responsibility among the Indian people, in their
villages, towns, districts and provinces. It allowed for self-governing communities to progress within the framework of their empire. The mildness of Gupta
rule exerted a cohesive and beneficial effect upon the social classes of India. It
was a highly pluralist world that was being created, a world in which groups of
people came together to define their common interests or activities; they
formed associations, solicited patronage and proceeded with creating prosperity
for themselves. The Gupta state was there to guide and help, not to coerce.
Gupta power maintained intact (415–67)
From the end of the fourth century the superpower of Europe, the Roman
Empire, was in great difficulties. Far from Rome, in the lands north of the
Black Sea and to the northwest of the Caspian Sea, a nomadic people from
Central Asia, the Huns, had established themselves in an aggressive federation.
Their presence destabilised another group of people living nearby, the Goths,
whose various tribes then broke through the eastern boundaries of the Roman
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 161
Empire. The empire could not be defended integrally, and in 395 it divided
into western and eastern halves. The fifth century proved to be a period of
horrendous difficulties for the Western Roman Empire. Alaric, the Goth
leader, sacked Rome itself in 410, and the ancient provinces of Gaul, Spain and
North Africa were seized by the Goths, the Franks and the Vandals. The
province of Britain was also conquered, by the Angles, Saxons and Jutes. In the
meantime, the Huns had moved further west, established their new headquarters in Hungary and found a new leader in Attila. Under him in the 440s
the dominance of the Huns attained its peak and, although Attila’s hordes
were finally defeated in the early 450s, the fate of the western empire was
sealed.21 Roman civilisation and the Pax Romana wilted away from the soil of
Europe. In contrast, during this period, the Gupta state in north India maintained its commanding position. The reign of Kumaragupta I (415–55) was a
period of consolidation of the state structure, with its refined administration
reaching out benevolently into the grass-roots villages of north India to ensure
peace and prosperity, which came to be symbolised by the monarch’s highly
elegant gold and silver coins.22 The chaos and confusion of the collapsing
Roman Empire seemed far away indeed, although not for long!
The Huns who damaged Roman Europe were but one branch of the federated
Hun family of the Hsiung-nu.23 Originally migrating west from the borders of
China during the first two or three centuries of the Christian era, the Hsiungnu had divided into two branches, one moving towards the River Volga and
the other towards the River Oxus. What the Volga Huns did to the Romans
and Goths, the Oxus Huns were to repeat in northwest India during the late
fifth and most of the sixth century. From the name of their rulers’ family, the
Huns of the Oxus valley came to be known as the Hephthalites, or the White
Huns, as the Greeks referred to them. In India, specifically, the term Huna is
used instead of Hun. From the Oxus valley the Huna (the White Huns)
advanced towards both India and Persia, and in 460 they occupied Gandhara.
Their advance, however, was stalled by the Gupta emperor Skandagupta (455–
67), who proved to be more than a match for them. Their defeat at his hands
not only gave north India another thirty years of respite from the Huna
incursions but also deflected them towards launching further attacks into other
parts of Eurasia.24
Guptas in decline (467–c. 550)
With the death of Skandagupta, in 467, the line of illustrious imperial Guptas
comes to an end. From now on, until about 550, we note a succession of weak
and ineffectual rulers. The liberal and benevolent polity that the Gupta state
had been for nearly two centuries was now going to be a plaything for its
enemies, internal and external. Despite being checked in 460, the Hunas
remained the most dangerous foreign enemy. Around 500, under a leader called
Toramana, they again invaded northwest India, Rajasthan and the western
Ganga basin. Toramana’s domain stretched from Persia to Khotan, with its
162 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
capital at Sakala. In areas of India under his control Toramana brought much
trade and encouraged groups of merchants to make donations to religious
foundations,25 and his rule was not an unmitigated disaster. In 510 he was
succeeded by his son, Mihirkula, who made further and deeper inroads into
Indian territory. Eventually, in 528, a powerful confederacy formed by the
Gupta king Narasimha Gupta Baladitya26 and the ruler of Malwa, Yashodharman, checked Mihirkula and forced him to take refuge in Kashmir. While
Mihirkula, like his father, also gave grants and donations, most sources confirm
his legendary reputation as the most aggressive Huna leader. He betrayed the
ruler of Kashmir, perpetrated great massacres and visited wanton cruelties
upon the Buddhists.27 On his death in 542 north India gave a sigh of relief.
The days of Huna glory were finally over by the 570s, when another group of
nomadic Central Asian Turks defeated the Oxus Huns and invaded Afghanistan. Although the Hun danger had passed, the legacy of their incursions into
India was bloody and tumultuous. The decentralised administration of the
Gupta state could not take the strains imposed by the large-scale military
counter-measures required against the Hunas. The quality of life in north
India, which had attained a high level of refinement in the fourth and fifth
centuries, suffered considerably in the resulting period of economic instability.
While most of the Gupta revenue was drawn from land taxes, a significant part
of it was obtained from India’s lucrative trade, by land and sea, with West
Asia, the Levant and the Mediterranean basin. The Hun incursions virtually
destroyed the land trade, depriving the Guptas of valuable foreign currency;
the latter were dealt a further blow when the ports of Gujarat strayed out of
their control into the hands of their local rivals.28 The sizeable diminution of
their wealth is indicated by the paucity of inscriptions recording the various
grants of lands and gifts traditionally conferred by them. The real death blow
to the empire, however, came from the internal crisis of the Gupta dynasty: the
weak and inept emperors were confronted with the assumption of their right
to hereditary rule by provincial governors and imperial feudatories, and were
powerless to check it. In fact, among the scanty records of the sixth century, we
notice the rise of a new phenomenon: the self-asserting inscriptions issued by
heads of regional families who once paid homage to the Guptas. By about 550
the empire had become a pale shadow of its former self.
Gupta society: a world in transition
Fa-hsien, a Chinese pilgrim, visited India in the early fifth century during the
reign of Chandragupta II. His aim was to collect Buddhist manuscripts and
relics and to seek the knowledge of Buddhism in the places of its origin. He
had left China in 399, crossed the Gobi desert, the mountains of Khotan, the
Pamir plateau, Swat and Gandhara, and stayed in India for nearly seven years,
visiting such places as Peshawar, Kanauj, Kashi, Kapilavastu, Kusinagar,
Vaishali, Pataliputra and several other Buddhist sites. He left India by sea from
the port of Tamralipiti, and visited Ceylon and Indonesia on his homeward
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 163
journey. Fa-hsien never had an audience with Chandragupta II, and neither
was he interested in the politics of his kingdom. His main concern was
Buddhism.29 Nevertheless his recollections, which were translated by French
scholars only in the nineteenth century, are worth reading from his particular
viewpoint. He called India the ‘Middle Kingdom’, a term normally used in
reference to China, and he vividly describes the free and liberal society of India
that he found practically everywhere. The two particular matters that clearly
impressed him were, firstly, the facilities of welfare and care for the weaker
members of society and, secondly, the ordinary people going about their daily
life in an atmosphere of peace and order, with little interference from the state.
There was no capital punishment, and the public officers were held to be noncorrupt. People lived with moderation, abstaining from alcohol and meateating. Clearly Fa-hsien’s portrayal of Chandragupta II’s India is uncritical and
adulatory, and we need to be more circumspect before accepting his observations
as reliable: he only saw what he wanted to see. For example, there is evidence
for the prevalence of alcohol-drinking and meat-eating.30 Fa-hsien’s work does
not help us to understand some of the deeper changes that were taking place in
Gupta society. The varieties of inscriptions, whether on temple walls or copper
plates, are far more useful for this purpose (see Extract 8.1). From much
detailed research now available, we can see that the achievements of the fourth
and fifth centuries did not take place in the climate of enduring stability of Fahsien’s imagination; there was also a considerable change coming over society.
It could indeed be argued that the entire Gupta era was one of gentle transition,
a transition that can be witnessed in the changes severally occurring. The age
of Gupta transition acts also as a pointer to the new realities on the ground
during the succeeding centuries. We select here three areas in which there
were clear signs of change taking place.
Land grants and the early beginnings of feudalism
The idea of the samanta becomes even clearer when we examine the characteristics of the Gupta land policy. In contrast to the Mauryas, who acquired as
much land as possible under their officers, the Guptas actively gave away much
land in the form of land grants.31 This practice was prevalent in its nascent
form even during the early centuries of the post-Vedic era, when the kings
were enjoined to give gifts to their brahman priests or royal officials. It became
more widespread under the Satavahanas of the Deccan, the Shakas of western
India and the Pallavas of south India, but the Guptas made it a substantive
part of the discharge of their responsibilities. Two important types of land
grants were made by them: the religious grants to brahmans, individually or
collectively, known as brahmadeya grants; grants to institutions such as temples
and monasteries,32 known as devagrahara or devadana; and secular grants to
crown officers, craft guilds or, on rare occasions, military commanders. The
motive for the grants, particularly in the case of religious ones, was the gaining
of religious merit in an age of social and moral crisis that was commented upon
164 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
in the Puranas; however, a more pressing reason might have been the contraction of the monetary economy as a result of the shrinking of the previously very
large international trade with Rome and the Levant. Land was something that
technically belonged to the king, and he could dispose of it in any way he
thought fit. The land grants to individual brahmans were more or less
permanently alienated to the donees, thereby affirming their hereditary rights
over the lands. No rents were charged and all revenues that could be derived
from the produce of the cultivators could be retained by the new landholders.
The brahman landlord was expected to improve his land and to contribute to
rural prosperity. The cultivators became his possessions; as long as he did not
wilfully mistreat them he could use their labour in any way he preferred. There
is evidence that the new brahman owners made efforts to improve their estates.33
Sometimes entire villages with their people were alienated by the Gupta kings
either to a collectivity of brahmans or to the temples. The grants were rent-free,
but carried an obligation to collect taxes due from the cultivators to the state.
The relative lack of monetary resources would definitely explain the rationale
of secular grants to officers and administrators. These land grants were in lieu
of cash salaries for military and administrative service. Their privileges
included also the hereditary alienation of land and rights over its produce,
along with a variety of legal and administrative immunities. The various
categories of cultivators were again to lose the protection of the monarch and
his officials; and we can be sure that the attendant evils of forced and bonded
labour would have increased considerably in these altered situations.34
The Gupta land grants created a class of feudatory intermediaries in the
countryside. There was a limit to what the state could achieve for the countryside, but by creating layers of intermediaries the Guptas gave opportunities to
various people to become proactive in the management and improvement of
rural estates. While the state lost a certain amount of revenue and power, it had
in the new donees a class of people who would act as its support mechanism.
Some historians have described this development as a form of Indian
feudalism.35 They have recognised in it some of the features found in the fullblown feudalism of the type that was prevalent in Europe in the Middles Ages,
when lord and vassal, at various levels of the social pyramid, were bound
together in a chain of protection, homage and service. Other historians have
raised doubts about the applicability of the European feudal model to India;
and there has been a contentious debate engaged by scholarly protagonists on
both sides of the argument.36 What is indisputable is that the small-scale
programme of land grants that the Guptas inherited and further encouraged
became greatly accelerated in the post-Gupta centuries; and land grants created
ideal conditions for some form of feudalism to flourish in India. In that sense,
Indian feudalism pre-dates European feudalism. From the time of the Guptas
until the mid-twentieth century feudalism remained a persistent factor in
Indian political and social life.
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 165
Varying fortunes of faiths and sects
The period of Gupta transition affected the religions of India in different ways.
Buddhism had been a powerful presence before the Guptas, partly owing to
the favours the Buddhists had won from sympathetic monarchs. The Guptas,
who were truly pluralist and broad-minded, continued with the established
traditions of patronage and support to the Buddhist monasteries and institutions of learning. For most of the Gupta period Buddhism was to enjoy a
healthy and robust life throughout most of India. Both the Mahayana and the
Theravada schools flourished in different parts of the country; and great
philosophers such as Vasubandhu, Dignaga and Dharmakirti either provided
masterly expositions of the founder’s teachings or expounded fresh ideas and
developed new schools of thought. Some of the finest Buddhist caves of Ajanta
were built under the patronage of the Vakatakas of the Deccan, the allies of the
Guptas. There was, however, an ominous cloud hanging over the horizon,
which was that, despite their widespread generosity, the Gupta emperors were
essentially followers of the Brahmanical religion, particularly of the theistic
schools of Shaivism and Vaishnavism. This meant, for the Buddhists, intense
competition for monarchical patronage. They could not take for granted the
quality and volume of support that they were accustomed from the previous
monarchs. Shaivism and Vaishnavism were also appealing to a broader range of
kings, besides the Guptas, in both north and south India; and that was bound
in the long run to have a deleterious influence on Buddhist fortunes throughout
the country. A much more serious and immediate danger for them in the
declining decades of Gupta rule was that of the horrendous destruction wreaked
on their monks and monasteries by the Hunas. What also perturbed them was
the support given to the Hunas by the Shaivite brahmans of Kashmir, who
expected to receive land grants from the Huna chief, Mihirkula.37
The oldest tradition in the country, Vedic Brahmanism, had been experiencing a gradual revival in the pre-Gupta centuries, but it was under Gupta
patronage that it secured the opportunity to establish itself more firmly in the
religious life of the people. The influence of heterodox ideas in Indian society
over many hundreds of years had, however, been sufficiently strong to prevent
the return of full-blooded Vedic Brahmanism. For example, one of its major
planks, the highly elaborate and sometimes bizarre ritualistic sacrifices in
propitiation of the old Vedic gods, was being gradually dismantled. These
sacrifices incurred much expense and many resources; and even the Dharmashastra of Yajnavalkya recommended that an expensive sacrifice such as that of
the Ashvamedha could only be performed when there was ‘a provision for three
years in one’s store’.38 There were now those who wished to modify and reform
the sacrifices, while affirming their faith in the supremacy of the ‘authorless
and eternal’39 Vedas and other essential belief systems of Vedic Brahmanism.
For the Shaivite and Vaishnavite theists, neither the reformed sacrifices nor the
eternal supremacy of the Vedas were of any consequence when compared with
the power and majesty of the one supreme deity, Shiva or Vishnu. Both the
166 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
theists and the reformist sacrificers, sometimes called Smartas, operated under
the umbrella of Brahmanism, but in their own distinct ways. In both Shaivism
and Vaishnavism the ceremony of the puja, with an image of Vishnu or Shiva as
the focus of worship, superseded the Vedic sacrifice. In the matter of the
conduct of worship, the orthodox Vedic Brahmanists remained wedded to
the role of the priest as being central to the performance of all the rituals, while
the theists greatly emphasised individual devotional worship, or bhakti,
without the necessity of priestly intercession. In the long run, all parties
eventually settled down to accepting a compromise. The upper castes continued
a number of Vedic rituals short of full-blown sacrifices, along with a respect for
theistic devotionalism. The mass of the people, under the influence of Shaivism
and Vaishnavism, became increasingly devotional-minded in their religious
attitudes.
One of the most important means by which millions of unlettered common
people, and particularly women, came to be imbued with a strong passion for
devotional worship was through the readings of a set of texts called the Puranas,
composed by the learned among the Shaivites and the Vaishnavites. The Puranas
became a primer of religious education for the masses. Written in an accessible
style, and containing a mixture of morality, history, genealogy, folklore and
practical wisdom, astrology, geography, medicine and countless other subjects,
the eighteen major and the eighteen minor Puranas became the key agencies
by which the Shaivites and the Vaishnavites drew the people towards them and
away from both Buddhism and orthodox Vedic Brahmanism. The rationale of
what we nowadays call folk Hinduism is best studied through the Puranic
writings. In today’s ‘Indological scholarship’, too, these writings ‘have regained
. . . the central place they have always occupied in living Hinduism.’40 While
their earliest compositions might have begun in pre-Gupta times and the later
works continued to be composed long after the Guptas, the Puranas are
essentially a product of the Gupta age.41 They are also a marker of the transition
that we witness in the fourth and fifth centuries.
Caste mobility
The caste system has remained a notable feature of Indian religious and social
life until the present. So it was too during the Gupta period. At the same time,
we also notice some indications of mobility and fluidity affecting the system
during this period. The first signs can be detected from the readings of the
various Dharmashastras that contain ample references to the caste system. These
normative sources have much to explain about the condition of the shudras,
slaves and various categories of labourers. With increased political decentralisation, economic expansion and the liberal use of land grants, large areas of the
country had become more accessible, with the result that many tribal groups
who had formerly lived very isolated lives were now brought within the caste
system. One might say that the detribalisation of India proceeded apace during
Gupta rule. Similarly, the older foreign groups, such as the Yavanas, the Shakas
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 167
and the Kushans, were also being acculturated into the caste hierarchy. There
is also evidence that the principle of caste endogamy was not as rigidly applied
as in earlier times. Both anuloma and pratiloma marriage conventions were
approved and socially recognised, despite the various strictures in the
Dharmashastras.
42 There was also a certain weakening of the links between a
caste and its vocation, as instances of the brahmans and the kshatriyas following
the occupations of lower classes and of vaishyas and the shudras adopting the
occupations of superior classes have been recorded. In a period of mobility it
was natural that some castes improved their standing, others stood still or rose
marginally, and some sank in social standing. The brahmans maintained their
status through their ability to read, write and recite; but members of lesser
castes could also improve theirs by performing any type of scribal work.43
Traditionally the kshatriyas were power-holders and power-brokers. However,
with the rise of many non-kshatriya ruling houses, it came to be gradually
recognised in the Dharmashastras that the king need not be a kshatriya by birth,
and that the kshatriya status was an ‘achieved, not an ascribed, rank’.44 The
vaishyas retained the third ritual hierarchical layer, but their influence grew
with numbers of jatis with useful trades and occupations multiplying and
flourishing. The shudras made a definite leap forward for themselves. The
relative improvement in the status of the shudras in Gupta society can be
evidenced by a number of developments among them. They increasingly went
into farming in capacities other than labourers and turned into sharecroppers
and peasants; they became craftsmen; they joined the army; and some got
themselves educated.45 They came to be granted definite legal rights that they
did not previously possess. While the Dharmashastra of Manu adopted a harsh
tone in relation to the punishments to be meted out in cases of shudra transgressions, the later Dharmashastra of Yanavalkayasmriti took a much more
humane and pragmatic line in this matter.46 Their forward movement, though
limited in scope, was a significant marker of social mobility; but it was
naturally counter-balanced by the growth of new outcaste groups, generally
known as the Untouchables. The latter were assigned the most demeaning and
polluting occupations, and they, along with the slaves, constituted perhaps the
lowest stratum of Indian humanity. Even Fa-hsien, who showered so much
praise on the India of his day, admitted that the Chandalas or the Untouchables
had to sound a ‘clapper’47 in the streets so that the caste people would be
warned of their presence, and that an upper-caste person would have to take a
ritual bath in the event of close proximity with an Untouchable.48
The ‘flowering’49 of Gupta Classical culture
In January 2000, an international seminar was held at Tiruvanthampuram
(Trivandrum), Kerala, India, to honour the 1,500th anniversary of the writing
of Aryabhatiya, a seminal mathematical treatise by Aryabhata I, the great
mathematician-astronomer of India who was born ad 476. Many Indian and
international Sanskrit scholars and historians of mathematics read papers
168 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
explaining Aryabhata’s mathematical insights and the relevance of his work
even today.50 The time during which Aryabhata lived has been labelled by
historians as the Classical period of Indian history (see Figure 8.1). The term
‘Classical’ implies unsurpassed intellectual and aesthetic excellence – a norm
against which all other similar achievements can be judged. Although there
was much creativity in India in both earlier and later times, many historians
feel that the Brahmanic–Buddhist–Jainist civilisation that had been maturing
for many centuries reached a particularly splendid height under the Guptas.
As the Guptas were the dominant power over more than half of India, the
historians talk of a Gupta Classical culture. Although this could be misleading,
because Indian creativity was not confined to the peoples and territories
controlled by the Guptas, there is no doubt that the liberal patronage of the
Guptas and their allies for the aspiring writers, artists, poets and thinkers of all
castes and creeds helped to promote excellence in general.
Mathematics and technology
Long before the Guptas came to power there had been steady progress made in
Indian mathematics.51 Such problems in mathematics as arithmetical operations, the geometry of altars, algebraic equations and the number theory had
already been investigated in earlier sources such as the Satapatha Brahmana,
the Sulvasutras, Jaina mathematics and the Bakhshali Manuscript. The Indian
number system, with ten symbols representing 1 to 9 and the zero, and the
Figure 8.1 The idea of the Classical in the Indian context: dancer Vinata Godbole
 performing the classical dance of South India (by permission of Dr Mahesh
 Godbole).
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 169
decimal place-value system, were also utilised, although the earliest documented symbol for zero dates from the Gwalior inscription of the ninth
century. A considerable body of astronomical knowledge, using mathematics,
was additionally contained in texts called the Siddhantas. Indian astronomy
began with the need, firstly, for accurate calendars for use in religious rituals
and for predicting rainfall patterns; it developed further with the rapid expansion of Indian trade, with the charting of high seas necessitating the exact
knowledge of tides and stars. Mathematical intervention was therefore crucial.
However, despite such progress made before the Guptas, we do not know of
any one person whom we can recognise as an iconic figure in Indian mathematics
or astronomy. Aryabhata I was the first great mathematician and astronomer
to whom this honour must be accorded: he lived at a time of great flux and
dynamism in Indian science as a whole. Whether in medicine or metallurgy,
music or mathematics, pharmacy or astronomy, new observations were being
made and ideas rigorously tested, with their results codified and synthesised.52
Aryabhata’s own work was neither prolific nor exhaustive, but it was he who
not only summed up, in a concise way, the precedent mathematical achievements but also provided new insights which later proved to be vital to the
development of mathematics. Practically all ancient Indian mathematical and
astronomical concepts were expressed in verse form, in sutras, in what might be
termed mathematical Sanskrit. The mathematical ideas in the Aryabhatiya of
Aryabhata I were also expressed in a sutra form, and only those few people
closely acquainted with both Sanskrit and mathematics can decrypt the
meaning of the sutras. Traditionally, the learned people disseminated ideas
through written commentaries on the original works; and further commentaries
on the commentaries were also made available53 (see Extract 8.2). There was
therefore much elitism and, perhaps, intellectual exclusivity. During the
Classical period, however, owing to greater openness of outlook and exchange
of ideas, schools of mathematics and astronomy began to flourish at places
as far apart as Kusumpura, Ujjain and Mysore, where useful mathematical
exchanges took place. Aryabhata himself may have been a native of Kerala, but
he worked at both Kusumpura and Nalanda. In the Aryabhatiya there are four
chapters, or Padas: Gitika Pada, Ganita Pada, Kalakriya Pada and Gola Pada.
The Ganita Pada, consisting of thirty-three verses, is the critical mathematical
text. It includes references to such concepts as squares, cubes, square-roots,
cube-roots, areas of triangles, the volume of prisms, areas of circles, the volume
of spheres, areas of quadrilaterals, the circumference of circles, elementary
trigonometry of series-figures, triadic rules, the reduction of fractions and the
theory of pulveriser. In order that mathematical information could be conveyed
in poetic form, Aryabhata I developed the alphabet-numeral system of
notation, by which specific numbers are allocated to specific letters of the
alphabet. He provided the methods to solve simple quadratic equations, which,
in the words of one historian, allowed him to earn ‘for himself the credit of
founding the science of Algebra’.54 From the other Padas we learn about his
belief that the earth was a sphere and that it rotated on its axis, and that eclipses
170 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
were caused by the shadow of the earth falling on the moon. His calculations of
the pi ratio and the length of the solar year were remarkably close to recent
computations. It would be a few more centuries before the works of Aryabhata
and his illustrious successor, Brahmagupta, would firstly be closely scrutinised
and then approvingly appropriated for development within the Islamic
mathematical tradition, which in turn eventually influenced European developments in mathematics.
Skilled craftsmen, working through their guilds, produced good quality
jewellery, ivory carvings and artefacts, ceramics and textiles, but the essential
technology of the Gupta period was concerned with metal work on copper and
iron. A seventh-century bronze statue of the Buddha, weighing 1 ton, found in
the ruins of a Buddhist monastery at Sultanganj, Bihar, in 1864, and now
housed in the Birmingham Museum, is the finest example of copper metalworking that began during this period using the cire perdue technique, which
has been described in some of the contemporary texts55 (see Figure 8.2). The
so-called Iron Pillar of Delhi, a shaft 24 feet high and weighing more than 6
tons, showing no signs of erosion or rust since about ad 400, is the best example
Figure 8.2 Sultanganj bronze Buddha (by permission of the Birmingham Museum
 and Art Gallery).
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 171
of iron technology in that period.56 For many centuries, excepting China, India
led the world in metal technology.
Sanskrit literature
Sanskrit literature flourished in the Gupta period. A large body of Brahmanic
religious literature, whether consisting of the epics or the shastras, was embellished and augmented by learned commentaries and critiques. Buddhist literature was systematised, and so was Jainist knowledge. Not all Sanskrit
literature was uniformly attractive or valuable, but certain works have left an
indelible impression on the mind and consciousness of the outside world. For
example, through the increased contacts of Classical India with the Middle
East and the Levant, the collections of animal fables, such as the Panchatantra,
and the Hitopadesha, or ‘Book of Wise Counsels’, subtly influenced medieval
European literature (see Extract 8.3). A Sanskrit work that has received the
unqualified praise of the literary world since the end of the eighteenth century
is Kalidasa’s Shakuntala. Kalidasa, one of the ‘Nine Gems’ who constituted the
circle of poets in the reign of Chandragupta II, wrote three plays, but Shakuntala
is considered his greatest work. As an admiring critic has said, ‘Of the arts the
best is the drama; of dramas, Shakuntala; of Shakuntala, the fourth act; of that
act, the verses in which Kanva bids farewell to his adopted daughter.’57 The
falling in love of Shakuntala and King Dushyanta and the parting gift of a ring
by the latter, their long separation, the curse of the sage Durvasas, Shakuntala’s
tender parting from Kanva and her search for Dushyanta, the story of the ring,
the return of the king’s memory, etc. – all these events are forthrightly unfolded
as the plot progresses. Sir William Jones was the first to translate the play into
English from its Bengali recension and to publish it, in 1789. The real impact
of the play was felt most on a long line of German Romantics, great geniuses
such as Schiller, Goethe and Herder; through their writings the glory of
Shakuntala was laid bare before the world. Another enchanting work of classical
Sanskrit literature, and now an international bestseller, is the Kama Sutra by
Vatsyayana. Although a great textbook of erotic love, it is unfortunately much
misrepresented and grossly maligned. This is partly because of the inadequate
translation of its depictions into English by Sir Richard Burton, one of the reckless adventurers and philanderers of the nineteenth century. Burton’s translation
gave the Kama Sutra a reputation of being a pornographic work. The Kama
Sutra fell victim to Burton’s own infantile and orientalist fantasies; and even
today the general public frankly feigns embarrassment at the mention of this
powerful work. A fresh translation, along with a new psychoanalytical interpretation of the text, has recently been published, allowing us to appreciate the
Kama Sutra for what it was intended: an account of the untainted and sublime
beauty of erotic pleasure, entirely separated from the ‘crude purposeful ness of
sexual desire’.58 A fascinating section of the text, called ‘The lifestyle of the manabout-town’, gives us an insight into what it was like to be a sophisticated rich
young man in the Indian urban culture of the fifth century ad.
172 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
Dissemination of knowledge: the Nalanda monastic college
The greatest of all the educational institutions of India during the second half
of the first millennium was the Buddhist college at Nalanda. It first gained its
status as a major centre of higher learning in the reign of Kumaragupta I
(415–55), and the year 425 ad ‘is the most approximate date’ of its establishment.59 For a long time before that there had existed a Buddhist monastery
on the Nalanda site, and Buddhist monks were trained there. Nalanda’s
transformation into an academic centre was a result of several fruitfully interacting factors during the Gupta era. If one of the purposes of such a centre is to
help young minds to understand, absorb, interpret and disseminate knowledge,
then ancient India was uniquely the land where there was no dearth of
knowledge. By the time of the Guptas, the amount of knowledge available in
India, albeit mostly oral, had reached a critical mass in terms of its range and
depth. The first huge area concerned the three religious systems themselves –
Brahmanism, Buddhism and Jainism – and the similarities and differences
between them. The second was that of philosophy and logic. Many philosophical
ideas had, by now, come to be crystallised into six major schools of thought,
called darshans or ‘points of view’; and there were intense intellectual debates
centred on their validity. The third area concerned grammar and epistemology.
From Panini onwards we know of a number of grammarians who had been
analysing, recording and classifying the vocabulary and grammar of Sanskrit;
and other scholars similarly worked in the Prakrit languages. Besides the
trinity of theology, philosophy and grammar, there existed much practical
knowledge in areas as varied as medicine, music, agriculture, astronomy and
mathematics. For a college or an academic institution to impart knowledge
usefully it needs able and learned scholars who are not narrow or biased in outlook. At the Nalanda monastery the highest standards were set by the Buddhist
scholars and managers who comported themselves like true academics. Scholars
of other faiths were always made welcome and given the opportunity to
introduce and discuss intellectual issues. The style of teaching was unpedantic
and non-didactic. It was very much in the form of dialogue or discourse, respectfully conducted through a series of propositions about the various qualities and
theories of knowledge and their refutations; and great philosophers such as
Dignaga, Asanga and Vasubandhu were teaching complex ideas at Nalanda.60
When the monastery received a large land grant, with rent eventually drawn
from nearly 100 villages,61 from the Vaishnava-oriented Kumaragupta I, its
financial affairs and future became secure. It was to last until about 1205.
With the range of subjects taught, the quality of the academic staff, the very
high standards demanded from the students, and the great renown of the
institution within and outside India – all these factors enable us to describe
Nalanda as a multi-functional college. Long before the Western world came to
embrace the idea of a college as an institution and as a centre of instruction
from the scholars of the Islamic world,62 everything that a college was ideally
capable of was being realised at Nalanda. The size of the silent ruins of the
Nalanda campus today allows us a glimpse of its glorious past.
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 173
The Vakataka achievement at Ajanta
Among the many great productions that have taken place over the years at the
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, London, perhaps the most enchanting
one for connoisseurs of Indian arts must have been the Ajanta Ballet of 1923.63
Performed by two of the twentieth century’s greatest dancers, Anna Pavlova
and Uday Shankar, the choreography of this ballet was based on the dance
gestures of the fresco figures and images in the Ajanta caves of Maharashtra.
The ballet was, in a sense, a culmination of a hundred years of the art world’s
fascination with the caves and their contents since they were ‘rediscovered’ by a
hunting party of British soldiers in 1819.64 What we see in Ajanta today is a
mute but eloquent testimony to the beauty and vigour of the Buddhist art and
architecture of India over a period of 700 years, between about 200 bc and ad
500. The site of Ajanta was strategically placed at the crossing of merchants’
and travellers’ routes that ran alongside it; and Buddhist monks and monasteries
were richly supported by that merchant class. Ajanta was only one, although
the most noble, of the many Buddhist caves of this period. Here, cut through
the living rock of the Deccan, around the bend of the River Waghora, are
twenty-nine man-made caves (see Figure 8.3, which shows twenty-eight of
these), and we can see the two main features of all such caves: the Chaityas and
the Viharas. The Chaitya caves are huge preaching halls with horseshoe-shaped
windows pierced above the entrance porches. The Viharas were like monastic
Figure 8.3 The plan of the Ajanta caves (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted from
 Rawson, op. cit., p. 84).
174 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
cells, sometimes two or three storeys high. The great bulk of the excavation
and construction had taken place during the first phase of 400 years after 200
bc; but the most spectacularly creative portions were completed in the very
short second phase of less than two decades in the second half of the fifth
century ad (see Figure 8.4). This later phase coincided with the reign of the
Vakataka king Harishena (460–78), the last great patron of Ajanta. The
Vakatakas had been, for the most part, subsidiary feudatories of the imperial
Guptas, but with the waning of Gupta power they came to enjoy a brief, if
truncated, spell of true independence and expansion of their territory. It was
Figure 8.4 An Ajanta façade (from Havell, op. cit., p. 52).
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 175
indeed good fortune for Indian art that Harishena was not only wealthy but
also truly dedicated to further embellishing the Buddhist art at Ajanta. New
caves were hewn, and it was chiefly on his orders that the most beautiful frescos
came to be created, depicting both divine and human scenes and associated
legends. More than the architecture, it is the Ajanta paintings that have
captured universal imagination (see Figure 8.5). These paintings, executed
with masterly skill in the use of materials and colours, portray Vakataka court
scenes and the Boddhisattava manifestation in its full glory (see Figure 8.6),
along with the narration of stories from the Jatakas. We can confidently assert
that ‘the architecture, paintings and sculpture that emerged and evolved in
Ajanta (in the Gupta–Vakataka Age) were to leave an impression on all
subsequent Indian, Central Asian and Far Eastern Art.’65
Figure 8.5 Shiva and Parvati at Ajanta (from Havell, op. cit., p. 196).
176 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 8.1 The Mandasor inscription of the silk-weavers
One of the most important developments in ancient Indian historiography
has been the opening up of studies of new areas of social and economic
Figure 8.6 Head of Bodhisattava at Ajanta (from Havell, op. cit., p. 200).
Stability and change under the imperial Guptas 177
life revealed by researches into a variety of inscriptions. A little-known
inscription, found some years ago at a place called Dasapura, now known
as Mandasor, in Madhya Pradesh, throws light on a number of themes
relating to ordinary peoples’ lives in Gupta India. This inscription,
written in verse form on a block of stone by an unknown brahman poet,
Vatsabhatti, celebrates the building of a temple by a guild of silk-weavers
who had come to Mandasor from their homeland of Lata, between the
rivers Narmada and Tapti. After invoking prayers to Surya, the sun god,
the poet introduces the weavers, their history and their industriousness;
he then describes the landscape of Mandasor by presenting an idealised
picture of its people and houses; and lastly he eulogises the glories of the
Gupta emperor Kumaragupta and the local ruler Bandhuvarman. The
temple, like a glorious crest-jewel shining in white with its lofty spires,
was built in the honour of Bandhuvarman in the year ad 437–8. However,
The Huna aggressions of the late fifth century had a destructive effect on
both the people and their buildings, and the temple had to be repaired in
the year ad 473–4 when, it is thought, Vatsabhatti also composed the
inscription.
Source: John F. Fleet, Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum: Inscriptions of the
Early Guptas and their Successors, Vol. 3, Calcutta: Government of India,
1888, texts and translations, pp. 79–88. See also A.L. Basham, ‘The
Mandasor Inscription of the Silk-Weavers’, in B. Smith (ed.), Essays in
Gupta Culture, New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983, pp. 101–3.
Extract 8.2 A problem attributed to Aryabhata by
 Bhaskara I (c. AD 600), one of the most able
 commentators on his work
Ancient Indian mathematicians formulated their problems with a human
touch, as can be shown in the following example.
Oh beautiful maiden with beaming eyes, tell me, since you understand
the method of inversion, what number multiplied by 3, then increased
by three-quarters of the product, then divided by 7, then diminished
by one-third of the result, then multiplied by itself, then diminished
by 52, whose square root is then extracted before 8 is added and then
divided by 10, gives the final result of 2?
The solution offered is elegant and simple: We start with the answer 2
and work backwards. When the problem says divide by 10, we multiply
by that number; when told to add 8, we subtract 8; when told to extract
the square root, we take the square; and so on. It is precisely the replacement of the original operation by the inverse that gives the method its
name of ‘inversion’. Thus
178 Stability and change under the imperial Guptas
Source: A problem sent in a note to the author by Dr George Gheverghese
Joseph, whose book The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics, London: Penguin, 2000, contains a number of examples and
problems from ancient Indian mathematics.
Extract 8.3 Doubts about the extent of influence of
 Indian fables on European literature
It is generally taken for granted that many European fables have their
origin in Indian fables. The following passage serves as a corrective to
this perception.
It would be difficult to make an exact account of the European folk
tales which are truly derived from India. No two stories are precisely
alike. The degree of similarity required before a particular tale can be
considered genuinely derivative from another one will differ from one
researcher to another. The earlier investigators of this problem in the
late nineteenth century had a tendency to overstate their case. For
instance, Joseph Jacobs calculated that, of the approximately 260
Aesops’ fables extant in Latin, 56 had Indian counterparts . . . But in
1957 Laurits Bodker, summing up the results of decades of folklore
research, asserted that, of about 500 animal tales recorded from
modern European oral tradition, only about 20 had close Indian
counterparts. Interestingly, the count goes much higher in the case of
literary fables: the Panchatantra is the most prolific source of Indian
stories found in Europe.

With the decline and fall of the imperial Guptas came the demise of the
imperial idea. It was in north India that this idea had had its greatest potency
and diffusion through the great empires built over many centuries by outstanding personalities such as Chandragupta Maurya, Ashoka, Kanishka and
Samudragupta; it was therefore in north India that the impact of its passing
was most felt. From the middle of the sixth century onwards, large and small
regional kingdoms were to dominate the north Indian political and state
apparatus, and their authority was to last for several centuries. Individual kings
dreamt about the attraction of pan-Indian control, and many of them, out of
sheer egotism, adopted pompous titles; but just one of them, Harsha, in the
seventh century, came near to realising such control, and that only for the
duration of his reign. In contrast to north Indian post-imperial fragmentation,
however, the south assumed greater prominence with the rise of two great
kingdoms. The first was that of the Chalukyas who, following in the footsteps
of the Satavahanas and the Vakatakas, established their authority in the Deccan.
The second was that of the Pallavas in the far south: after a long period of
acculturation and political gestation, the southern peninsula emerged from
political obscurity and began to assert its influence (see Map 9.1).
Our historical knowledge of this period is dependent on a variety of interlocking interpretations drawn by historians, linguists, archaeologists and
anthropologists. The historians and linguists have concentrated on numerous
inscriptions that either speak for themselves or need interpreting, along with
both contemporary historiographical material, such as the biography of young
Harsha by Banabhatta, and later historical sources. The archaeologists have
arrived late on the scene, but their research is helping to corroborate the conventional evidence; the anthropologists, bringing some of the insights gained in
other regions of the world, have given us incisive interpretations of the south
Indian cultures. If we are asked, however, to name one work from this period
that can be said to symbolise the spirit of the age, then it has to be Si-Yu-Ki,
the great account of India as portrayed by the famous Chinese Buddhist
traveller and pilgrim Hsuan Tsang. More than any other single work by him,
it is this text that today grips our imagination.1
 It contains all the rich details
of life in the India of the early seventh century, and must be classed among the
great geographical and social documents of the ancient world. We learn about
182 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
the conditions in several towns and villages, the social structure, the economy
and character of the people of India, their different laws and punishments,
their religious events and their festivals. While all the details naturally will
not meet our modern criteria for historical verifiability, this book is an indispensable asset for the historians of India.
North India fractured
A number of dynasties became engaged in fierce competition for the control of
north India during this period.2
 It all began in the middle of the sixth century,
with the later Guptas struggling against not only the Hunas but some powerful
Map 9.1 Post-Gupta kingdoms and the southern states.
200 miles
300 km
SRI
LANKA
Debal
Mathura
Pataliputra
Ellora
Mamallapuram
(Mahabalipuram)
CHALUKYA
KINGDOM
HARSHA’S EMPIRE
PALLAVA
KINGDOM
KALINGA
CHOLAS CHERAS PANDYAS
Kanchipuram
Badami
Aihole Pattadakal EASTERN CHALUKYAS
OF VENGI
Kanauj
Thaneshwar
KAMARUPA
Mansurah
Multan
KASHMIR KINGDOM OF
LALITDITYA MUKTAPIDA
ARAB CONQUEST
OF SIND
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 183
regional families too. Independent kingdoms began to spring up in different
places on the borders of the empire. Such kingdoms as Valabhi in Gujarat,
Gauda and Vanga in Bengal and Kamarupa (Assam) asserted their autonomy at
the margins of their empire, while the Gangetic heartland was itself subjected
to undue strains. In the latter area two great dynasties were finally to supplant
the weaker Guptas of the sixth century: the Pushyabhuti, based at Thaneshwar
in Sthanivishvara (now Haryana) and the Maukhari, based at Kanauj (modern
Kanyakubja), controlling the prime estate of north India, the doab, or the land
between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna. A marriage alliance between the two
royal houses was followed, however, by a war waged upon them by the kings of
Bengal and Malwa, resulting in many tragic killings.3
 Eventually the Pushyabhuti prince Harsha became the ruler of both houses, with his capital in
Kanauj, and controlled a substantial portion of the former Gupta territories.
Although Kanauj now began its period of glory, it also became a bone of
contention among the rival dynasties.
Harsha’s kingdom
Harsha’s kingdom lasted from 606 to 647. We know much about it from
accounts left by two of his greatest admirers: his friend, courtier and biographer,
Banabhatta, and the great Chinese traveller Hsuan Tsang. From their writings,
along with his own literary works, we can discern that Harsha played three
different roles: as a conqueror, an administrator and a man of intellect and
culture. Leaving aside the last two roles for consideration later, we must
acknowledge that Harsha was a man of power whose conquests were wide and
far-reaching. After he had unified the Pushyabhutis and the Maukharis and
transferred the capital to Kanauj, giving him the overlordship of the Maukhari
domains in the central Gangetic heartlands, he went on to conquer Bengal,
Bihar, Orissa, Gujarat and Punjab. Although he met defeat on the River
Narmada at the hands of the Chalukyan king Pulakeshin II, he came to be
recognised as the master of what was termed ‘the five Indies’.4
 An inscription
at Aihole in Karnataka, although outside his realm, describes him somewhat
exaggeratedly as the ruler of the whole of north India.5
 On defeating his rivals
he too, like the Guptas, adopted the neighbourly policy of the samanta. So
successful was this policy that even the powerful kings of Kashmir, Nepal and
Valabhi counted among his tributaries. Tai Sung, the Tang emperor of China,
was particularly friendly to Harsha, owing to the latter’s closeness to Hsuan
Tsang and extreme generosity towards the Buddhists.6
 Shortly after Harsha’s
death in 647 his kingdom broke up. No one of comparable stature appeared on
the scene, and the ensuing anarchy lasted for more than seven decades.
Yashovarman and Lalitditya
In the second quarter of the eighth century power in north India came to be
strongly contested by two great protagonists. One was Yashovarman, who
184 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
acceded to the throne of Kanauj after the post-Harshan anarchy and who ruled
between about 725 and 752. Yashovarman’s ambition was to conquer the
whole of India, and his armies penetrated as far as Bengal. He embellished the
city of Kanauj and established it as a symbol of his power and authority. He
was a great patron of arts and letters, and at his court resided the famous
playwright Bhavabhuti.7
 Yashovarman, however, faced hostility from the
other protagonist, Lalitditya Muktapida, the ruler of Kashmir between about
724 and 760.8
 Much conflict resulted between them, and other parties also
became involved in the fray: the Chinese, the Tibetans, the Arabs and the
rising Rajput dynasty of Gurjara–Pratihara. Each of these groups had strategic
agendas of their own, creating much confusion.9
 Lalitditya was able to keep
Yashovarman in check and deftly negotiated his way through the north Indian
political and military morass; but ultimately he perished with his army while
fighting the Tibetans in Sinkiang. With the passing of both Yashovarman and
Lalitditya, north India became the scene of rivalry among three great dynasties
of Gurjara–Pratihara, the Palas and the Rashtrakutas. The next chapter will
explore this in greater detail.
The Arab seizure of Sind
The fracturing of north India was aggravated by the Arab invasion of Sind, the
first foreign intrusion into India since that of the Hunas. Both Hindus and
Buddhists vied for power and influence in Sind before the Arab incursion. The
Buddhist Rai dynasty ruled until 622, when Chach, the brahman minister of
the Buddhist king, usurped the throne and imposed a tyranny. By the time his
reign ended, in 666, he had alienated the varied groups of Jats, Meds and
Buddhists.10 The civil unrest worsened after Dahir, the son of Chach, became
king in 679, and it was he who faced the Arab invasion in 711. Although considered to be an exceptionally difficult task to achieve, the conquest of India
was one of the very early aims of the Muslim geo-political strategy. As early as
644, at the end of the caliphate of Umar, the Arabs had entered Makran on the
Baluchi coast. By the time the Umayyad caliphate began under Muawiya
(661), systematic Arab reconnaissance of the Sind coast was under way.11 The
Umayyads had their power centre at Damascus, but they appointed provincial
governors in the areas the Arabs held or wished to hold. One such governor was
Al-Hajjaj, who was based in Baghdad from 694 to 714, with his official title of
‘governor of Iraq and Hind and Sind’. An opportune moment for Al-Hajjaj to
attack Sind occurred when Dahir failed to respond positively to a request by
him to act over an incident of piracy in which Muslim women and children had
been caught up. After his lord and master in Damascus, Caliph al-Walid (705–
15), had been persuaded to authorise punitive measures against Dahir, the
command of an invasion force was entrusted to his young nephew Muhammad
al-Qasim. A relatively small and highly mobile naval task force, equipped
with some deadly siege artillery, enabled Muhammad first to take Debal, the
commercial port. From there, after crossing the River Indus, he marched upon
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 185
Brahmanabad, where, in a major battle, Dahir was killed. Muhammad then
married his widow, Rani Ladi. With Lower Sind taken, Muhammad moved up
the Indus, towards Upper Sind, and eventually reached Multan. Sind had now
definitely become part of the Umayyad-controlled Islamic Empire.
Chalukyas and Pallavas: the Deccan and the deep south
In the Deccan the two mighty kingdoms of the Satavahana and the Vakataka
had exercised uninterrupted power after the Mauryas; and the monarchic
tradition was set to continue with the Chalukya and Pallava dynasties. The
former established a major presence during our period, while the latter assumed
importance after the mid-eighth century. The Deccani kingdoms had a strong
commercial tradition; during these centuries they were to become great
beneficiaries of the Indian Ocean trade with the rising power of the Arabs. In
the deep south of India, while the Aryanisation process over many centuries
had been making a considerable social and religious impact on the life of the
people, the imperial idea had not grasped the peoples’ imagination, partly
because of the enormous distance separating the far south from the imperial
heartland in the Gangetic basin. State foundation and the rise of kingdoms in
the far south came much later than in the north, but their development arose
out of factors unique to southern culture and its geography. From the sixth
century the southern kingdoms, drawing strength from their prosperous agrarian base, their profitable commercial links with the outside world and their
powerful temple cultures, created and imprinted their own styles of authority
and governance.
The Chalukyas
The Chalukyas originated from the Kadamba region of the Karnataka, which
remained their main base.12 They also pushed into the lands where the
Satavahanas and the Vakatakas had once dominated. Three distinct families of
the Chalukyas eventually emerged: the Early Chalukyas of Badami (525–757),
the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi (624–1020) and the Later Chalukyas of Kalyani
(973–1200); in terms of relative importance, the Early Chalukyas were the
most significant. Their real power began with Pulakeshin I (543–66); it
reached its zenith in the reign of Pulakeshin II (609–42); and it was consolidated
by strong-minded rulers such as Vikramaditya I (654–68), Vijayaditya (696–
733) and Vikramaditya II (733–44). The last ruler, Kirtivarman II (744–57),
was overthrown by another regional power, the Rashtrakutas. History’s most
famous Chalukyan monarch was Pulakeshin II. During his reign of thirtythree years he made aggressive moves against all the rulers who surrounded the
Chalukyan heartland. He established suzerainty over Gujarat and Malwa, and
frightened off King Harsha sufficiently for the latter to confine himself to the
overlordship of the lands north of the Narmada river. He brought the Andhra
region into his family’s patrimony, and this eventually gave rise to the dynasty
186 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
of the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi. His great victories are honoured in the
renowned Aihole prasasti by his court poet, Ravikirti, and inscribed on a slab of
the eastern wall of the great Meguti Temple of Aihole in Karnataka.13 The
Chinese traveller Hsuan Tsang also paid tribute to his courage and valour, and
said about his army that, ‘if a general loses a battle they do not inflict
punishment, but present him with women’s clothes, and so he is driven to
seek death for himself.’14 Pulakeshin overreached himself, however, when
he attacked the rising southern power of the Pallava kingdom, resulting
ultimately in his defeat and death in 642.
The Pallava kingdom
From the Sangam literature of the Tamils we learn that, as early as the third
century bc, there were three distinct kingdoms in the south of India: the Chola
kingdom of the southeast coast, the Chera kingdom of the southwest coast in
Kerala, and the kingdom of the Pandyas in Madurai region.15 For many
centuries just before and after the Christian era, while experiencing increasing
Aryanisation, Brahmanisation and Sanskritisation, south India had also
enjoyed relative prosperity through a rich base of agriculture and international
trade. This can be evidenced from the Sangam literature.16 The three kingdoms
themselves, however, registered little impact upon the overall Indian political
scene. Their territorial interests were generally parochial, except in relation to
Sri Lanka, whose capture always appeared to them as a tempting prize. The
political situation changed dramatically in the sixth century with the rise of
the Pallava kingdom in a core region of the south called Tondaimanadalam,
which today corresponds to the northern portion of Tamil Nadu. Kanchipuram
was the main urban centre. There are two theories about the origins of the
Pallavas. One is that they were the descendants of a group of Parthians from
Iran; and the other describes them as the descendants of north Indian brahman
migrants.17 No one can be entirely certain, but, whatever their origins, it
cannot be denied that they became one of the great southern regional dynasties.
The dynasty dated itself as early as ad 275, but its great epoch straddled the
seventh and the eighth centuries, when rulers such as Narasimhavarman I
(630–68), Parameshvaravarman I (670–700) and Narasimhavarman II (695–
728) left their mark on contemporary history – all dates falling within our
period.
The Pallavas and Chalukyas held sway in adjacent territories. They had
much in common in terms of religion, society and economy, and had many
overlapping cultural traditions and rituals. Yet they were unable to live in
complete peace with each other. In fact, a hundred years’ war raged between
them, and the inscriptions of both dynasties provide long lists of conquests by
their rulers. The first round in the interminable Chalukya–Pallava conflict had
gone to Pulakeshin II, whose victories are recorded in the Aihole inscription.
The Pallava revenge, however, came with Narasimhavarman I’s attack on
Badami in 642, resulting in the death of Pulakeshin II. The Chalukyas were for
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 187
a time overshadowed by the Pallavas, and their dynasty also faced a succession
crisis. However, from 655 onwards, under Vikramaditya I, they commenced
the second round of warfare against the Pallavas and captured their capital
city, Kanchipuram. Once more, the Pallavas took their retribution. And so it
went on, the Chalukya–Pallava conflict, year after year, during the late seventh
and early eighth centuries. The last great attack by the Chalukyas on the
Pallavas took place during the short reign of Vikramaditya II (733–44). In a
major campaign of 740, Kanchipuram was again captured. As if to safeguard
his reputation and the honour of his people for posterity, Vikramaditya II
ordered an inscription to be carved on a pillar of the city’s newly built
Kailasanatha Temple, recording both his conquests and his generosity towards
the people of the vanquished city. This inscription was left unerased by the
Pallavas when they regained the city.18 While on certain occasions, and
particularly if the army commanders were especially cruel, this type of conflict
could be very barbaric, resulting in death and destruction on a horrendous
scale, it is also worth noting that most inter-Indian conflicts in this period
took the form of low-intensity warfare. The final outcome of their hundred
years’ war, however, proved to be destructive for both the Chalukyas and the
Pallavas. The former had always been the initial aggressors, and had therefore
aroused the envy and hatred of many of their neighbours. By the middle of the
eighth century, with their energies sapped, they became ready prey to the
rising power of the Rashtrakutas. The Pallavas survived for a century more,
but they too had exhausted themselves by their wars with the Chalukyas and
the Pandyas of Madurai. In the ninth century they would be overwhelmed by
both the Rashtrakutas and their older rivals, the Cholas.
Political and economic perspectives
Sources of royal legitimacy
Generally speaking, most Indian kingdoms of this period were hierarchical
and bureaucratic states. Harsha’s kingdom was a case in point. The legitimacy
of the political sovereignty of his kingdom was derived from the concepts
articulated in such famous texts as the Upanishads, the Mahabharata, the
Arthashastra and the Manusmriti, written before the fourth century ad, or more
recent texts such as Katyayanasmriti (c. ad 400–600), Haritasmriti (c. 400–700)
and Kamandaki’s Niti-Sara (c. 400–600), which contained useful advice on
kingship.19 Of great importance was the concept of dharma, the moral law.
There might be different types of kings and conquerors – righteous, greedy or
plain demonic – but they were all obliged to follow dharma. The king, however,
had a powerful tool at his disposal, which was the threat of danda, or punishment. Both dharma and danda were the backbone of kingship, but successful
kingship also depended upon the close alliance of the brahman and the
kshatriya.
20 Most kings were genuinely kshatriyas or contrived to be so; however,
the legitimacy of their power also rested on the brahman support mechanism.
188 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
Once secured, that power became real, and exercised through bureaucracy. The
rulers could control taxation and maintain large centralised armies. The land
grants, made either to the brahmans or to the feudal vassals, reduced overall the
king’s actual control over land, but did not affect his ultimate exercise of
sovereignty. Thus, some of the famous rulers of our period, such as Harsha and
Pulakeshin II, exercised real control through bureaucracy, even while devolving
power over many of their lands to their subordinates.
Most conventional histories of south Indian kingdoms also described the
kingdoms of the Pallavas and their famous successors, the Cholas, as centralised
bureaucratic states, with overall supremacy vested in the king. However, this
view has been countered by another argument, which holds that the south
Indian kings enjoyed mostly symbolic or ritual power, legitimised by notions
of dharmic kingship; the real power lay with the self-governing and nearautonomous peasant communities or local power structures of south India
known as nadus.
21 Certainly, owing to the increasing level of Brahmanisation
in south India, it was natural that the monarchs made available land grants to
the brahmans and extended royal patronage to the temples; but these were in
fact defence stratagems for the monarchs. Instead of calling the Pallava or
Chola kingdoms bureaucratic, it is argued, an appropriate term to use would
be ‘segmentary’, because political authority and control were highly local.22
This particular interpretation owes its source to comparative anthropological
studies of certain African peasant societies that structurally resembled the
peasant communities of south India.23 Although there is no universal agreement
on this interpretation, we have here at least two different models of power and
legitimacy.
The mandala and the samanta
Inter-state relations among the Indian states of that period, like those of
Harsha, were organised on the principle of what is generally called a mandala.
24
This principle, articulated in the Arthashastra of Kautalya and the Niti-sara of
Kamandaki, presupposed a circle or orbit of states around any one kingdom;
the circle normally consisted of twelve states, including the dominant kingdom. Starting with the nearest state and moving outwards, the five states with
shifting allegiances in front of the kingdom were presumed to be the enemy,
the friend, the friend of the enemy, the friend of the friend, and the friend of
the friend of the enemy. Similarly, at the rear of the kingdom, again in the
order of location, would be positioned the rearward enemy, the rearward friend,
the friend of the rearward enemy, and the friend of the rearward friend. Somewhere in the orbit, but fairly close to the kingdom as well as to the enemy,
there was posited an intermediary state; and, finally, a neutral state was situated
somewhere well beyond the territory of all the other states. Although a
theoretical construct, bearing only a notional relationship to events ‘on the
ground’, the mandala principle allowed ‘political elites to make sense of the
shifting events of their political world and to formulate theories of “diplomatic
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 189
action”’.25 It was evidently enunciated on the basis of common-sense observation of the political state system in post-Vedic India. The kings were
encouraged to be active participants of the mandala by adopting certain key
strategies at appropriate times. These would include making an alliance,
declaring a war, being neutral, preparing for attack without declaring a war,
seeking protection from another state, or making use of a ‘double policy’ which
was making peace with one and waging war against another. Each king had to
try to secure his position in the mandala by adopting one or other of the six
strategies. Headstrong kings, such as the great Chalukyan ruler Pulakeshin II,
simply went for total domination of their mandala by being always aggressive
or adopting aggressive stances, until in the end they dominated wholly for a
while or were then themselves consumed by a great defeat, as Pulakeshin
himself was. Wiser rulers, such as Harsha, followed in the footsteps of the
great Gupta monarch Samudragupta, who won many conquests but never
exulted over the vanquished. These rulers normally created the samantas, those
defeated peers who continued to maintain their dignity and honour even as
they became lesser tributaries paying homage to the conqueror. Harsha’s
mandala became a less intimidating circle of states for him, because it consisted
of friendly samantas or maha-samantas who acknowledged him as paramount
sovereign.26
Political accommodation within the Islamic context
The seizure of Sind by the Arabs in 711 provides an opportunity, within the
period covered by this chapter, to look afresh at some of the Islamic political
strategies of accommodation with contesting powers. This is important because
of much misunderstanding over this aspect, resulting in needless demonisation
of medieval Islamic rulers. From the second quarter of the seventh century the
Arabs began a series of military campaigns that eventually established their
domination over the Middle East and North Africa. A new social and cultural
order, based on the principles of Islam, was forged in the conquered territories.
The early Muslim philosophers and theologians conceived of the ordered world
as the ‘House of Islam’ (dar al-islam), which, according to them, was their
world of peace. Those who lived beyond that world lived in the ‘House of War’
(dar al-harb), or ‘foreign territory’. From the earliest period of their own
internal struggles within Arabia, and across many centuries, the believers
battled to bring the infidels into the ‘House of Islam’. Only defeats, sheer
exhaustion or internal decay could stop them. From the very beginning,
however, the promoters of the Islamic Empire faced a major problem, which
was how to reconcile their aspirations with the realities of the world. It is
important to appreciate that, however impassioned the religious rhetoric
behind the projection of the Islamic Empire might have been, Muslim leaders
and men of action on the ground were never entirely swayed by it and, more
often than not, exercised their authority either pragmatically or rationally. For
example, the arrangements and treaties made with their potential enemies
190 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
created for Islamic jurists a new legal category of the ‘House of Truce’ (dar alahd, or dar as-sulh), which meant that an Islamic ruler could be reconciled to a
ruler, a people or a state which was not Islamic but was at peace with him.27
Over the question, too, of the treatment of unbelievers, the scriptural injunctions were flexibly interpreted by most Muslim rulers. Originally, the status of
the ‘people of the book’ (ahl al-kitab) was granted to the Jews and the Christians,
and they were therefore ‘protected subjects’ (ahl adh-dhimma). However, since
the same status had been earlier granted to a people called the Sabians, most
Muslim rulers appreciated that the Zoroastrians of Iran and the Hindus of
India, both people with their own extensive scriptural heritages, should also
qualify for that status.28 Such flexibility was displayed by the conqueror of
Sind, Muhammad al-Qasim, in his dealings with the various power groupings
in that province.29 The promoters and rulers of the Islamic Empire were also
often victims of circumstances caused by internal squabbling and civil wars.
These disturbances were called fitna, and they often resulted in horrendous
dynastic and family killings. The idea of a constitutional monarchy remained
an alien concept in such an atmosphere. Many a good Muslim ruler in history
was a victim of fitna, leading to his destruction. Just four years after his conquest, Muhammad al-Qasim himself became such a victim and forfeited his
life.30 It is therefore important not to exaggerate the power of the mediaeval
Islamic rulers. In the control of Sind by the Arabs for nearly four centuries we
have a trenchant example of both the power and the limitations of those
rulers.
Political and economic strategy behind land grants
We observed in the previous chapter that the imperial Guptas had increasingly
followed the ancient practice of donating state land as grants to brahmans or to
some of their officers. The programme of land grants accelerated during the
post-Gupta centuries, and the royal dynasties saw in it a means of demonstrating
their power and authority. Specific evidence is available for Harsha’s land
grants to brahmans or religious institutions from just a few inscriptions, along
with the references in Harsha-charita or Si-Yu-Ki; one of his religious endowments was a donation of 100 villages of 1,000 ploughs each to brahmans.
31 The
copper plates of the Pallava kingdom provide information on land grants in
the far south. Historically, there had been a continuing argument among the
political and social thinkers of India as to whether the king had the sole right
of ownership of all land in his kingdom or merely the entitlement to collect
taxes; the general assumption was that all waste land or uncultivated terrain
was state property and kings could confer those lands upon whom they
pleased.32 During his travels through Harsha’s kingdom, Hsuan Tsang
observed that royal land was divided into four categories assigned to four items
of expenditure, namely expenses relating to government and state worship,
endowments to ministers, rewards to persons of great ability, and charity to
various faiths and sects.33 Land was generally measured in terms of ploughs,
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 191
drawn by a given number of cattle, to till a certain acreage. Therefore, when
the kings donated their income from land they declared the extent of arable
territory in plough measures. A minor samanta in Harsha’s time would be
entitled to an average village of 1,000 plough units, or 1,333 acres of land.34
Differential conditions applied to different beneficiaries: some were granted
outright gifts with all the assets of the land, including peasants; others could
enjoy the revenue but had to pay a land tax; while yet others were expected to
provide a certain amount of service. Although mostly unrecorded, Harsha’s
secular grants provided a considerable boost to the growth of feudalism and a
feudal mentality in north India. The Pallava kings of south India made substantial endowments to the brahmans. As mentioned above, the far south had
a flourishing tradition of peasant cultivation within local autonomous units
called nadus; but Brahmanisation also proceeded apace throughout south
Indian society over many centuries, and the influence of the brahmans was
paramount in the villages. While the Pallavas needed the brahmans to confirm
the legitimacy of their rule through the use of rituals, they also appreciated the
valuable role the latter could play in increasing land productivity. They
therefore created entirely new villages called the brahmadeya, by granting
either the entire village or parts of it to a single brahman, or groups of them,
who not only kept the revenue arising from the labour of the peasants, but also
did not pay any tax.35 The practice of granting lands to institutions such as
temples became more pronounced after the Pallavas, under the Cholas.
The state of agriculture
Despite all the political upheavals of this period, Indian agriculture remained
robust and prosperous, as attested by a number of sources. For example, the
late Gupta encyclopaedia and lexicon the Amarakosha, for example, has much
information on the forests and gardens as well as trees and plants of India.36
Another useful source is the travelogue of the Chinese pilgrim Hsuan Tsang.
He mentions the cultivation of cereals such as rice and wheat, with the region
of Magadha producing a most fragrant variety of rice called ‘rice for grandees’;
there were also rich and extensive orchards of delicious fruits such as mangoes,
melons, plums, peaches, apricots, grapes, pomegranates, sweet oranges, apples,
jackfruits and coconuts.37 Another source, Banabhatta, mentions the fertility
of the soil in Harsha’s kingdom, and refers to plentiful crops of sugar cane,
vines and a variety of beans. For generating greater revenue from land, the
Indian kings encouraged the sciences of agriculture and animal husbandry.38
They also asked the specialists to construct reservoirs for the regular supply of
water. The state was meant to provide facilities for cattle-breeding and for
controlling plant and cattle diseases. Then, as now, the more or less guaranteed
and seasonally regular natural supply of water ensured a flourishing agriculture
on the vast plains of north India, from Punjab down to Bengal. The one
limiting factor was that, with crops grown through undemanding labour,
the north Indian peasant was content with a minimal level of agricultural
192 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
technology. An exception to this may be found in a dry region such as
Rajasthan, where irrigation by wells and water-tanks was more common, and
where evidence exists of a primitive form of technology prior to the Persian
wheel.39 With low rainfall and a relatively small volume of water carried by the
southern rivers, southern agriculture required great ingenuity in the use of
soil, seeds and water. From even before the Sangam Age the southern peasants
had been experimenting with various forms of irrigation and mixed-crop
farming40 (see Extract 9.1). It was, however, during our period, under the
Pallavas, that huge irrigation tanks, or man-made lakes with earthen walls,
known as eri, were built on eripatti, or tank land.41 The Pallava kingdom was
constituted from twenty-four localities of Tondaimandalam, called kottams.
Each kottam was a unique zone of agrarian, pastoral and village-based economy,
supported by irrigation based on reservoirs and small lakes.42 The advanced
skills required in the building and maintenance of these tanks would have
been provided by the brahman entrepreneurs and settlers in the brahmadeya
villages.43 The Pallava inscriptions provide us with details of the use and care
of these earthwork tanks (see Figure 9.1), and there is evidence of sluice
mechanisms being used in the Pallava irrigation schemes.44
New directions in India’s international trade
The fall of the Western Roman Empire and the disappearance of the flourishing
trade with Rome meant a certain definite decline from the end of the fourth
century in the value and volume of Indian international trade.45 One indicator
of this was the paucity of metallic money from the late Gupta period onwards.46
That was certainly a time of turbulence, but it would be wrong to assume that
international trade suddenly collapsed and society relapsed into ruralism. In
fact, during the two centuries under review, new prospects for long-distance
trade were emerging; and then, almost until the beginning of the eleventh
century, Indian international trade remained brisk and dynamic. As far as the
western Indian Ocean trade was concerned, it is worth noting that the Eastern
Roman Empire had not fallen to the Huns or the Goths, and the Greek and
Byzantine mariners were now jointly venturing with the Ethiopian traders in
activating and promoting the Indian Ocean trade.47 Another major maritime
power, in direct competition with Byzantium, was Persia. Before the rise of
Islam the pagan Arabs, Persian Zoroastrians and Persian Christians had all
plied the trade routes of the Arabian Sea and the Persian Gulf under Persian
suzerainty. However, with the sudden emergence of Islamic power after 622
and the spectacular defeat of Persia by the Arabs in 651, the new masters of the
Indian Ocean were all now Muslim. This control enabled the Muslims to link
the Indian markets with the Islamic world.48 We shall examine this Muslim
commercial dominance in greater detail in the next chapter. In the eastern
Indian Ocean too, great opportunities for trade were opening up for the
merchants of south India. By the seventh century a number of kingdoms had
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 193
been established in Southeast Asia, such as Kambuja and Funnan (Cambodia),
Champa (Vietnam) and Sri Vijaya (southern peninsula of Malaysia, Java and
Sumatra). There had been a strong Indian cultural and commercial influence
on these kingdoms for many centuries, and during the heyday of Roman trade
the Indian merchants and shippers had brought spices from there to India for
transhipment to Rome in exchange for some of the Roman wares. The Pallava
rulers built dockyards and developed a navy, which enabled the south Indian
mariners to enjoy a near monopoly of trade until the Muslim maritime
challenge in the eighth century.49 Besides the oceanic trades, the land routes
also continued to be used. According to Hsuan Tsang’s testimony, the medium
of exchange in trade consisted of such items as gold, silver, cowries and small
pearls.50 India–China land trade flourished in the seventh century as well as it
had in the post-Mauryan centuries, and Chinese silk was always highly prized.
It may be noted, however, that both the Chinese and the Indians suffered as a
result of the Byzantines surreptitiously learning the art of cultivating silkworms.51 The land trade with Central and West Asia also continued; Banabhatta
refers to fine steeds and horses from there in Harsha’s stables.52 In conclusion,
we can say that there was little diminution of trade in the two post-Gupta
centuries between 550 and 750.
Figure 9.1 South Indian tank scene (by permission of RHPL).
194 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
Cross-currents of culture
The religious landscape
The most reliable information about Buddhism in our period comes from the
works of Hsuan Tsang, the inveterate Chinese Buddhist traveller-monk who
wandered through India for fifteen years, between 630 and 645, eight years of
which he spent in Harsha’s kingdom. His reputation for Buddhist learning
and wisdom had brought him to the attention of Harsha, who wanted to meet
him and honour him. He and Harsha very soon struck a bond of friendship.
Hsuan Tsang has left us records of the grand assemblies and festivals that
Harsha organised, at which Buddhism was feted and honoured.53 What Hsuan
Tsang saw in Harsha’s kingdom, however, was not the whole story. In many
parts of India he actually found Buddhism in great decline, and the ruins of
monasteries and stupas testified to this decay. Some rulers were exceptionally
harsh towards Buddhists, but in most places there was general tolerance and
acceptance. The challenge to Buddhism, and Jainism too, came not so much
from Vedic Brahmanism as from the two great schools of Vaishnavism and
Shaivism. As we saw in the previous chapter, both these schools of thought had
begun in the earlier centuries; but, during our period, their influence grew
enormously in the south of India. The ‘simple-hearted’54 devotees, or bhaktas,
sometimes known as saints, were the Shaiva Nayanars or Vaishnava Alvars.
Their songs, poems and hymns, all glorifying either Vishnu or Shiva, were
utilised principally in the process of weaning the south Indian masses away
from the heterodoxies. The Bhakti Movement can also be seen, in that sense, as
a reaction against the power structures and elites within the south Indian
kingdoms, such as those of the Pallavas.55 The religious literature that was
born out of the Bhakti Movement of intense devotion and surrender to personal
gods, led by the Nayanars and Alvars, lay at the heart of worship in the great
temple centres of the south56 (see Extract 9.2). An unfortunate aspect of it,
however, was the growth of sectarianism and sectarian rivalry among its diverse
following.57
Sanskrit literature
A great deal of Sanskrit literature of this period relates to the great north
Indian king Harsha. We have already referred to Harsha’s leadership qualities
and administrative prowess, but he saw his role extending beyond the onus of
waging wars and conducting affairs of state. He was a man of considerable
literary talent (see Extract 9.3), as evidenced by the three Sanskrit dramas that
he himself wrote. His Ratnavali was a masterpiece, a very standard Sanskrit
drama, which dealt with the story of the marriage of King Udayana and Ratnavali, the daughter of the king of Sri Lanka. The second work, Priyadarshika,
had a similar theme, but also contains a play within a play, which is called
garbhanka. His third drama, Nagananda, deals with the themes of self-sacrifice
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 195
and love. All three dramas made a contribution to the evolution and development of Sanskrit literature after Kalidasa.58 He led the way for other Sanskrit
dramatists such as Bhavabhuti and Bhatta Narayana and served as inspiration
for the Pallava king Mahendravarman, who composed a farce called Mattavilasa.
The best example of Sanskrit prose in this period comes from the pen of Bana
(Banabhatta), Harsha’s biographer. Bana is admired by Sanskrit scholars
because of the intensity and vivaciousness in his use of language. He has a
unique gift for portraying all manner of situations and circumstances in the
India of his day, whether domestic or public; his eye for detail shows in his
depiction of themes as varied as war, love, revenge, faith or plain daily life.59
His biography of Harsha, the Harsha-charita, is what is called an Akhyayika, in
contrast to a katha or a romance based on a purely poetic creation. It would not
be wise to rely on it for a systematic historical account of Harsha’s reign, but
there is sufficient information in it for us to form a strong mental picture of the
personality and character of this great king.60 It is a very positive image that
we receive, as Harsha is Bana’s hero; and Bana’s admiration is reflected in his
prose.
Southern literary culture
Literary culture in the south was promoted in the early stage by the educational
institutions and monasteries run by the Jain and Buddhist monks and scholars,
many of whom specialised in Sanskrit. With the advance of Vaishnavism and
Shaivism through the region, essential Brahmanical learning in Sanskrit came
to be provided by an institution called a matha, which was like a boarding
school. The Pallava kings were no mean donors to the cause of education and
culture, and the city of Kanchipuram housed many educational and cultural
centres. Sanskrit enjoyed royal patronage,61 and all the early Pallava inscriptions
are in that language. While the later inscriptions were in Tamil, the prasastis
were nevertheless composed in Sanskrit. To the Pallava courts, both in this
period and earlier, came famous Sanskritists such as Dignaga and Dandin, the
great writer on poetics; and there can be no doubt that the Pallavas were
patrons of such literati. While Sanskrit was promoted as a language of high
culture, Tamil nevertheless remained the key medium of instruction in the far
south. Its confidence was far greater than, for example, that of Kannada in the
Chalukya kingdom, which was, at this stage, still considered a somewhat poor
relation to Sanskrit. Lyric poetry and great epics were composed in Tamil. Just
before our period the great epic of Shilappadikaram, produced by Ilango Adigal,
had appeared;62 in contrast to the earlier stories of heroic violence, it extolled
the virtues of non-violence and duty. The very famous text of Tirukkural, composed by Tiruvalluvar, again a little before the period covered by this chapter,
was also part of the rich tapestry of Tamil literature.63 The Tamil poems were
suffused with rich descriptions of both country and town and the activities and
lifestyles of people engaged in different spheres of work; and it has been said
that ‘compared with classical Sanskrit literature, the early Tamil literature was
196 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
closer to the realities of life’.64 During the reign of the Pallavas the hymns, the
devotional songs and the mantras chanted by the Nayanars and Alvars and their
devoted followers of Vaishnavism and Shaivism were collected into a volume
which came to constitute a major branch of Tamil literature. In fact, one could
say that the best of Tamil literature of this period is almost wholly influenced
by the religious movements in the south.
Temple architecture in the south
The great temples of India are normally classified into three styles of architecture: northern, Deccani and southern. All of them have common features such
as the vimana (sanctuary), the garba griha (inner chamber for the idol), the
shikhara (tower) and the mandapa (pavilion), but there are some key differences.
The towers of the northern-style temples are curvilinear or bulging, while
those of the southern style are pyramidical. The Deccani towers, while pyramidical, are lower than in the northern style. The southern-style temples also have
extensive enclosures and great gopurams (gateways), while the Deccani temples
are star-shaped or polygonal rather than square, as in the other two styles. It is
only from the ninth century onwards that the northern-style temples develop
in all their glory. In contrast to the late start of the northern style, the Deccani
and the southern varieties developed during the epoch under review. The
Deccani styles began with the Early Chalukyas of Badami (535–757) and
developed further under the Late Chalukyas (tenth to fourteenth centuries)
and the Hoysalas (twelth to fourteenth centuries). The southern temples began
with the Pallavas in our period, and reached their apogee under the Cholas
(900 to 1150) and the Pandyas (1100 to 1350). The Chalukyan culture revolved
around the temples, and what remains of the striking architecture of that
kingdom cannot fail to impress upon us the significance of a richly endowed
Brahmanic religious culture in their part of the Deccan. The main monuments
are clustered around three sites in the Karnataka: Aihole, Badami and Pattadakal (see Figure 9.2). Each was the centre of royal power in its turn. Aihole
was the first capital; here, for many centuries, the Chalukyan craftsmen
perfected the styles of the first built temples, as distinct from those carved out
of solid rock. The oldest of such temples is the Meguti Temple, built in 634,
according to an inscription by the court poet Ravikirti.65 The first dated
reference to Kalidasa, the author of Shakuntala, as provided by Ravikirti, may
also be seen in this temple. Badami was the second capital. Here there are some
extraordinary temples with immensely vivacious sculptures of gods and
goddesses. The Melagitti Shivalaya Temple is one of the finest examples in the
seventh-century Deccani temple style. Inside a large number of many other
temples can be seen the valuable inscriptions detailing the victories of a regal
hero such as Pulakeshin II or treaties and relationships between the Chalukyas
and their rivals, the Pallavas.
Two main centres of population, the capital city of Kanchipuram and the
port city of Mamallapuram (Mahabalipuram), were at the hub of Pallava
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 197
culture and influence. Kanchipuram is one of the seven sacred cities of
Hinduism, dedicated to both Shiva and Vishnu, and renowned as a great seat
of learning and philosophy in all Tamil Nadu. Among the great freestanding
temples the Pallavas built in the city, the most beautiful are the Kailashanatha
Temple and, slightly ahead of our period, the more famous Vaikuntha Perumal
Temple.66 Inscriptions narrating the history of the Pallava kings and eulogising
their glories formed part of the panelled sculptures on the temple walls. At the
port city of Mamallapuram are further testimonies to the Pallava contribution
to culture and architecture. The Five Rathas, named after the five Pandava
brothers, are miniature temples demonstrating the evolution of the southern
temple style.67 The Mahabharata episode of Arjuna’s penance and the flowing
of the River Ganga from Shiva’s hair are depicted in an enormous frieze which
is cut into a flat, granite rock face, 28 metres long and 12 metres high.68 The
most glorious monument of Mamallapuram is, of course, the famous Shore
Temple, facing the Bay of Bengal, and renowned throughout the civilised
world (see Figure 9.3).
Translations and transmission of ideas
Indian intellectual and cultural influences were felt far and wide during this
period. Although clear evidence of the lines of transmission is not always easily
available, we are on fairly certain ground in relation to two foreign nations:
China and Persia. With the rise of the Tang dynasty in China in 618, IndoChinese diplomatic and cultural contacts increased apace. The Chinese monks,
including Hsuan Tsang, arrived in India to learn about Buddhism; they were
particularly excited by the idea of spending some time at the Buddhist educational centres such as Nalanda.69 On the other hand, the Indian Buddhist
missionaries and scholars in turn were increasingly to be seen in the principal
Figure 9.2 The Deccani-style temple of Pattadakal (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted
 from Tomory, op. cit., p. 118).
198 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
cities of China. Learning each other’s language was the great passion of the
period, and Hsuan Tsang led the way in this venture. He translated seventyfour different Indian works consisting of 1,335 chapters.70 On his return
journey to China he needed twenty-two horses to carry all the manuscripts.71
Prabhakaramitra, the great Indian scholar and professor from Nalanda, reached
China in 627 and, with the help of nineteen Chinese scholars, was engaged in
translating Indian Buddhist texts into Chinese.72 Another, Bodhiruchi, went
to China in 693; with the help of the Chinese board of translators, specially set
up for him by the royal court, he translated fifty-three volumes of Indian texts
before his death in 727.73 Apart from Buddhism, the Chinese were interested
in Indian mathematics, medicine and astronomy. A Sui dynasty catalogue of
about 600 lists Chinese translations of Indian works in these three subjects.74
Indian astronomy was also taught at an official Chinese centre for astronomical
education. In both India and China, at that time, there was much mathematical
work being pursued independently; but there was a good possibility of the
Figure 9.3 Shore Temple at Mamallapuram/Mahabalipuram (Pat Baker: line drawing
 adapted from a photo in Rawson, op. cit., p. 109).
The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south 199
transmission of ideas and knowledge in both directions. Their renditions were
the most important means to achieving the success of the transmission.
The last great non-Islamic dynasty of Persia was that of the Sasanians. As
inheritors of the famous Achaemenid dynasty, the Sasanian rulers held a high
conception of their role and power. Their imperial ideology was based on the
Zoroastrian doctrine that all knowledge that was useful, wise and sacred
emanated from Ahura Mazda, the Lord of Wisdom; and to promote that
ideology the Sasanians spared no efforts at collecting, recording and editing
historical and religious texts and treatises from wherever they could be found.75
King Shapur I inaugurated an academy of learning at Jundishapur in the third
century ad, but it was another Sasanian king, Khosrau I Anushirvan, who, in
the sixth century, encouraged translations of Greek, Syriac, Indian and Chinese
scientific and literary works into Pahlavi (Middle Persian).76 It was under
Khosrau’s patronage that his minister Burzoy travelled around India meeting
learned people, one of whom introduced him to the Panchatantra, which he
translated into Pahlavi; from then on, this book of Indian fables became highly
popular through numerous translations.77 While we lack the names of particular scholars, we can be fairly certain that a number of Indian mathematicians,
astronomers and medical practitioners also went to Jundishapur to disseminate
their knowledge. Reliable Arab-Islamic sources of later centuries confirmed
this and noted the importance of both the Jundishapur academy and the Indian
contribution there.78 It should also be noted that the game of chess originated
in India, and it moved to Iran in the seventh century.
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 9.1 Agricultural innovations in the Tamil
 country
An eminent specialist of the agricultural history of India explains the
way the Tamils learned to practise agriculture in a fairly harsh natural
environment.
Technologically, two processes over the centuries formed the agrarian
landscape [of the Tamil country] that we see today. On the one hand,
people dug and shaped the earth to manipulate water, to put surface
and sub-soil moisture to work. Tamil people built their civilization
around irrigation. On the other hand, they adapted an enormous array
of crops, seed varieties and cropping techniques to exploit the potentials of different soils and variable water supplies . . . Irrigation has
throughout Tamil history provided a proven means to raise land productivity. Not surprisingly, Tamils divided agriculture into two main
categories, whose lands connote goodness and poverty, respectively.
200 The post-Gupta era and the rise of the south
Irrigated wet land is ‘nanjai’, and un-irrigated dry land is ‘punjai’.
Each of these two categories of cultivation supports its own staple
grain – rice or millet – and, in Tamil cultural tradition, one embodies
the good life, the other meagre subsistence.
Source: David Ludden, Peasant History in South India, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1985.
Extract 9.2 An example of Shiva bhakti in Tamil
 religious literature
An Alvar, known as Appar, a great Tamil poet-saint who lived in the
seventh century, has left us this powerful hymn devoted to Shiva:
We are not subject to any; we are not afraid of death; we will not suffer
in hell; we live in no illusion; we feel elated; we know no ills; we bend
to none; it is all one happiness for us; there is no sorrow, for we have
become servants, once for all, of the independent Lord . . .
Source: Ainslee Embree, Sources of Indian Tradition, London: Penguin,
1992, p. 346.
Extract 9.3 Harsha’s signature
A particular inscription from the early seventh century, known as the
Banskhera Inscription, was issued in Harsha’s name. Inscriptions with
royal signatures are extremely valuable, and this has one of the very fine
examples of a royal signature. The signature, MAHARAJADHIRAJASRIHARSASYA, was prefaced by the phrase SVAHASTO MAMA (‘This is
my signature’). The German scholar J.G. Buhler, has said:
if Harsha really used these characters in signing all legal documents,
he must have been a most accomplished person, and the cares of government and conquest of India must have left him a great deal of leisure.
A great art historian has explained thus:
It should be remembered that Harsha was an eminent poet and connoisseur . . . and his appreciation of penmanship may have led him to
master the beautiful script attributed to him. The florid lines of these
letters have parallels in the southern Pallava Nagari inscriptions at
Mahabalipuram and in the Kailasanatha temple at Kanchipuram.

The two and a half centuries of Indian history covered in this chapter were
characterised by two crucial developments that led to profound consequences
for the succeeding 800 years of history. Firstly, India became increasingly
regionalised. Between the mid-eighth century and the end of the tenth century
we see the growth of a number of regional kingdoms, of which some demonstrated unique features of state formation. Secondly, the regionalised society
became highly feudal. Feudalism would long remain a persistent factor in the
shaping of Indian society and its mindset, although its characteristics would
undergo much transformation in succeeding centuries. The political economy
of the kingdoms was substantially feudal; and, despite various dissenting views
among historians, the inscriptions provide strong evidence of the way feudalism
linked the state and its economy. The political narrative of this period is
dominated by struggles among three particularly powerful regional kingdoms
for control of the core territory of Madhyadesha. There were conflicts in the
south too, but it would not be until the next two centuries that the southern
story would become especially significant, with the rise of the Chola kingdom.
Regional kingdoms served as the geographical bases of regional cultures and
languages, and the literary culture of our period begins to show signs of a
distinction between Sanskritic elitism and the regional literary styles. Some of
the finest religious architecture of India was conceived and completed during
this period.
Three regional kingdoms
Of the many kingdoms of our period, three may be classified as metropolitan
in terms of their size, strength and capacity: the Gurjara–Pratihara kingdom
in Rajasthan and Madhyadesha, the Bengal kingdom of the Palas, and the
Rashtrakuta kingdom of the Deccan. Each of these kingdoms was more or less
equally matched, but each was also weakened by internecine warfare over
primacy in Madhyadesha (see Map 10.1).
204 Regionalism and feudalism
The Gurjara–Pratihara kingdom in Madhyadesha
From the middle of the eighth century the dominance over Madhyadesha
became the ambition of two particular clans among a tribal people in Rajasthan,
known as the Gurjara and the Pratihara. They were both part of a larger
federation of tribes, some of which later came to be known as the Rajputs (see
Figure 10.1). There has been much controversy about the origin of the Rajputs,
as to whether they were the descendants of the indigenous inhabitants of India
or of the Central Asian Hunas (the White Huns) who had attacked northwest
India during the later Gupta period.1
 It is difficult to arrive at a firm conclusion;
Map 10.1 The struggle for Kanauj among the three titans.
200 miles
300 km
Ellora
Nalanda
Manyakheta
(Mankhed)
Kanchipuram
MOUNT ABU
TIBET
Bay of
Bengal
Arabian
Sea
SRI
LANKA
KAMARUPA
Key
Boundary of GurjaraPratihara Empire
Rashtrakuta Kingdom
Pala Kingdom
Kanauj
ARAB KINGDOM
OF SIND
Regionalism and feudalism 205
but what we do know for certain is that the various Rajasthani tribes, including
the Gurjara and the Pratihara, who were originally a nomadic and pastoral
people, underwent a major social transformation between the late sixth and the
ninth centuries ad. A process of assimilation into the Aryan Hindu fold
gathered strength at this time throughout north India, and the Pratiharas
particularly vaunted their martial qualities, in order to be recognised as the
kshatriya Rajputs.2
 With their enhanced status, the Gurjara–Pratihara made a
significantly tactical move by transferring their capital from Bhilmal in
Rajasthan to Kanauj in Madhyadesha, a move made as a result of the latter
being perceived as both a spiritual and a geo-political heartland. It also became
clear that whoever held the city of Kanauj would enjoy a pre-eminence over
north India. From this city it was easier to subdue most of the Ganga valley.
The control of this fertile and resource-rich region, with its busy water
transport system and considerable trade, has throughout history been essential
for raising revenue for all Indian rulers. Under Harsha (606–47) Kanauj had
gained metropolitan status as both an imperial seat and a centre of north India’s
finest culture; but its star shone brightest after the Gurjara–Pratihara made it
their capital in 815 and held a brilliant court there, becoming the envy of their
neighbours. A ninth-century Persian traveller, Abu Zayd of Siraf, wrote of
numerous brahman ‘poets, astronomers, philosophers and diviners’ in Kanauj 3
(see Extract 10.1). Honouring their earlier commitment to defend India
against the Arabs, the Gurjara–Pratihara put strong pressures on Sind; in a
contemporary Arab account from 851 about the greatest of the Pratihara kings,
Raja Mihir Bhoja, we read that ‘among the princes of India there is no greater
foe of the Muslim faith than he [Bhoja]’; but there ‘is no country in India more
safe from robbers’.4
 In his tenth-century description of the land of al-Jurz (the
Arabic name for Gujarat, part of the Pratihara kingdom) the Baghdad Arab
writer Al-Masudi also expressed the Arabs’ concern about the hostility of the
Pratihara towards them.5
 He, however, exaggerated their strength, because the
military realities on the ground were exceedingly complex. The Arabs were
not the only enemy that the Pratihara had to deal with. Their two Indian
rivals, the Pala and the Rashtrakuta, were far more dangerous, and did their
utmost to deny them the monopoly of power in Madhyadesha. They did not
succeed, however, because in the late eighth and ninth centuries six of the ablest
Pratihara monarchs, particularly Bhoja (840–85), fought them to a standstill.
The Pala kingdom of Bengal and beyond
Bengal played a leading role in Indian politics between the eighth and the
eleventh centuries.6
 This was the age of the famous Pala dynasty, some of
whose rulers were the ablest in ancient India. For nearly a century after Harsha’s
death in 647, Bengal had been subject to much interference and disruption by
its near and farther neighbours. The respite came in 765 with the election by
the people of an able leader, Gopala, who was neither a brahman nor a kshatriya.
The dynasty prospered under Gopala’s successors, Dharamapala and Devapala.
206 Regionalism and feudalism
The Palas realised the importance of Madhyadesha in the Indian political world,
and fought hard to gain power and influence there. Their main rivals, of course,
were the Gurjara–Pratihara and the Rashtrakuta, although with the latter
there were useful marriage alliances. In the triangular contest over Madhyadesha
and Kanauj, all three dynasties ultimately exhausted themselves. However, the
fact that the Palas were ever-present, asserting their right to reorder affairs to
their advantage, meant that Bengal was no longer on the margins of the Indian
polity. Over different periods of time, the dynasty also ruled over Bihar, Orissa
and Assam. The Bengal kingdom’s reputation reached beyond the boundaries
of India, into Nepal and Tibet and, above all, towards Southeast Asia, in Java,
Sumatra and the Malay peninsula ruled by the Shailendra dynasty.
Commerce and religion linked the fortunes of Bengal, Tibet and Nepal.
There was also the desire for territorial power. The Palas were forced to pay
attention to their northern frontier by keeping a wary eye on Tibetan aspirations. Nepal was the principal bone of contention between Tibet and Bengal.
From the seventh century onwards the Tibetan resurgence had begun to overawe Nepal; and for nearly two centuries Nepal remained within the political
shadow of Tibet.7
 At the same time, Nepal could not escape the Sanskritic
influences and Buddhist missionary work that continued to arrive from Bengal.
Through Nepal also ran a major trade route between Tibet and Bengal.
Although Nepal herself broke loose from Tibetan hegemony in 879, the
general Tibetan domination was a fact of life that the Palas could not ignore.
Figure 10.1 The Rajput stronghold of Jaisalmer (by permission of RHPL).
Regionalism and feudalism 207
While Tibet maintained very close commercial and Buddhist links with
Bengal, on a number of occasions her armies invaded Bengal and posed a major
threat to the Pala supremacy. Some of the Tibetan sources, in fact, talk of a
kingdom extending from Mongolia down to the mouth of the Ganga.8
 It
may be surmised that the Tibetans ultimately contributed to the collapse of
the Palas.
Bengal’s relations with Assam and Burma too were complex. Assam was
known as Kamarupa or Pragjyotisha. Here there were many Mongoloid-featured
people, who had migrated from such areas as Nagaland and Burma, and
between 350 and 800 two Mongoloid dynasties ruled over Assam. However,
just as in Bengal, the Sanskritisation process had been under way throughout
the first millennium of the Christian era. Assamese monarchs had dominated
Bengal until Dharamapala reversed the situation and extended the Pala
suzerainty in Assam.9
 The key factor that made Assam a vital area for the Pala
monarchs was its strategic position, lying on the main trade routes between
Bengal and China and between Bengal and Burma. Assam was the entry point
into the northeast then, and is so today. The great Arab geographers of the
Middle Ages have described at length the extensive trade network of Bengal
with Burma.10 A continual supply of gold and silver facilitated commerce
greatly. The extensive silver mines of Burma were particularly crucial, and the
River Irrawaddy was a major transport waterway. The commodities from
Bengal included aloe-wood, pottery, rice and both fine and coarse textiles.
Among cultural influences from Bengal were particular architectural forms,
sculptures and Tantric forms of Buddhism. Both Bengal and Burma strengthened their ties further when new challenges arose from the Cholas.11 Pala
suzerainty in Bengal and eastern India lasted until the end of the eleventh
century, when they were succeeded by the Senas, who, in turn, lost out to the
Turkish Khaljis in the thirteenth century.
The majesty of the Rashtrakuta in the Deccan
The word ‘Rashtrakuta’ means ‘peaks among kingdoms’. It was used as an
epithet for a dynasty of rulers who carried the Sanskrit title of Vallabha-Raja
and who ruled from their capital at Mankir, or Manyakheta, now called
Malkhed, southeast of Sholapur in Maharashtra. The title of Vallabha meant
‘beloved’. It was from a Prakrit term, Ballaha-Raya, that the Arabs came to
call the Rashtrakutas Al-Ballahara; and in Arab historical sources the Rashtrakuta kings were thus known.12 The dynasty was founded by Dantidurga,
who called himself Prithvi-Vallabha, ‘the beloved lord of the earth’, but it truly
prospered under his successors. It lasted until the end of the tenth century and
produced some of the most outstanding monarchs of India: Krishna I (760–
75), Dhruva (780–93), Govinda III (793–814), Amoghavarsha I (814–80),
Indra III (914–28) and Krishna III (939–67).13 The Arab travellers of the ninth
and tenth centuries have left us vivid accounts of the wealth and glory of the
Al-Ballahara. According to Al-Masudi (d. 956) and Ibn Khordadbih (d. 912),
208 Regionalism and feudalism
most of the kings of Hindustan turned their faces towards the Ballahara king
while they were praying, and they prostrated themselves before his ambassadors.
The Rashtrakuta king was the King of kings who possessed the mightiest of
armies and whose domains extended from Konkan to Sind.14 Another Muslim
writer, Al-Idrisi, talks of a large kingdom, with vast stretches of cultivated
lands, abundant commerce and plentiful resources, resulting in huge wealth
and revenue.15 And this was the Indian kingdom that was to be most hospitable
to the Arab merchants. The Rashtrakuta controlled the Deccan vigorously,
but the north and the south had to be fought over continually. The main aim,
in all northern campaigns, was the capture of Kanauj, which was finally
achieved in the early tenth century by Indra III. In the south the enemy was the
Chola kingdom, whose rulers were crushingly defeated in the middle of the
tenth century. Despite these victories, the Rashtrakuta confronted the same
challenges that all Deccan monarchs always faced: they had to be careful to
balance their gains in the north with the possible losses in the south if they
tarried overlong in the north, and vice versa. Continual fighting drained their
resources; and, in the eleventh century, they were overthrown by a feudatory
who established a new dynasty, known as the Western Chalukyas of Kalyani.
Political economy in the feudal era
The debate on feudalism
Karl Marx described feudalism as the pre-capitalist stage of development in
the social and economic history of Europe. It was a stage in which the mode of
agricultural production was based on the relationship between the lord and the
peasantry. In this relationship the peasants owed the lord labour service for
being allowed to till the soil and eke out a subsistence living. They also had to
accept extensive judicial powers over their lives as a measure of protection by
the lord. Historians have also debated over feudalism as a method of maintaining order at a time, particularly between the tenth and the fourteenth centuries
in Western Europe, when public institutions were in a state of crisis and flux.
In that situation private relationships had become crucial; and one of the key
manifestations of this relationship was the arrangement by which a tributary
lord attached himself to a liege lord for protection through homage, tribute
and military service. Whichever way feudalism may be understood, it was
essentially ‘a system based primarily on the exploitation of the peasantry’, as
Frank Williamson, a dedicated communist thinker of recent years, has put it.16
One of the noted social features of any system of exploitation is the obsequiousness shown by the humble towards their superiors. The distinguished twentieth
century historian R.S. Sharma has argued that the political, social and economic
development of India during the period examined here can be characterised as
feudal too.17 He sees the subservience of the lower classes of people and their
servile mentality arising out of the oppression of their superiors. He has based
his argument on the evidence, as he saw it, of manifestations resulting from the
Regionalism and feudalism 209
widespread disruption in the post-Gupta period, such as the loss of public
revenues through the decline of trade and debased coinage, the issuing of land
grants (fiefs) by monarchs to their subordinates, the subjugation of the
peasantry by landed intermediaries, and the rise of religious devotional movements emphasising loyalty and reverence in general. The fact that the Puranas
contain descriptions of the general disorientation within contemporary society,
leading to the breakdown of old loyalties and certainties, has also been used as
an argument to support the feudal thesis. In opposition to Sharma, it has been
contended that, far from being an age of political decentralisation, the postGupta period in fact witnessed a growth in state power through a continual
series of state formations in the form of new regional kingdoms. The land
grants were not a sign of the sovereign’s weakness, but a method of legitimising
his authority; and a question may also be posed as to whether the land grants
could be said to be responsible for the increase in the oppression of the
peasantry, when in fact the peasant subjugations increased from the thirteenth
century onwards under the Delhi Sultanate, which made comparatively few
land concessions. The point about the decline of trade and coinage is also
fiercely contested.18
While the counter-arguments against the feudal thesis are increasingly
being articulated on the basis of new research, there is still a core of evidence
that lends support to the essentials of Sharma’s analysis. Land was the critical
resource for the potentates of a pre-modern society. Other resources included
control over manufacturing and trade, but they could not match in importance
the land factor. The inscriptions from our period contain many references to
grants of land from the monarch to his subjects and their emergent issues. The
king parcelled out lands to groups of people for different reasons – either to the
brahmans or to royal officers and bureaucrats – and with the land concessions
went the attachment of the rights of land revenue. Many of the grantees of land
acquired a range of fiscal and judicial rights over taxes and rents; and most
often the contracts stipulated that they could collect revenues and rents from
the peasants but were not obliged to pay taxes themselves.19 At a higher level of
decision-making, large grants of land were conferred by monarchs to dynastic
collaterals for maintaining princes within the orbit of their influence. The
subordinate princes, as feudatories, bore certain responsibilities, for example
to raise levies for the king’s armies, to consent to marriage alliances, or to
attend court with appropriate pomp and pageantry. The king assured for
himself a continuing check on these feudatories by creating titular posts as
indicants of their place and status in the overall scheme of things. Of course,
the feudatory princes became all-powerful in their own domains, enjoying
luxurious lifestyles in their palaces and castles. They, too, in turn, created a
subordinate layer of lesser feudatories; and in this way the feudal structure and
power spread from our period onwards.20 The magnificence of the famed courts
of the Indian maharajas of later centuries derived directly from the feudal
princely courts of this earlier period (see Figure 10.2).
210 Regionalism and feudalism
Kingdom formation and dynastic legitimation: the northern
context
A great variety of regional kingdoms flourished in this era. They arose for a
number of reasons.21 Quite often, those whose ancestors had originally received
land grants from a previous ruler broke loose from the existing kingdom and
formed new polities. Again, as utility lands were being increasingly wrested
from forested terrain, new territories emerged under new names, with local
chieftains sometimes assuming a dominant role and, sometimes, forming
Figure 10.2 An Indian maharaja of modern times (by permission of RHPL).
Regionalism and feudalism 211
alliances with existing kingdoms. The forest dwellers, who normally lived in a
pre-state situation, were being increasingly drawn into the processes of state
formation through interaction with the sedentary peasant societies, thereby
fostering a new state. Once a kinship group or a clan acquired power over a
defined territory and control over the economic resources of that region, then it
was not too difficult for its power-holders to initiate the process of forming a
new state. In practically all the states the caste system was to retain its grip
wherever Brahmanic influence remained pervasive.22 This meant that the
kingdom model, based on the girder of the brahman–kshatriya alliance, became
the standard for all states. The boundaries of kingdoms never remained static,
because the ambitions of their rulers led to either the expansion or the
diminution of their territories, depending upon their capabilities. Nevertheless
there was an enduring association of a particular kingdom with a distinct
geographical or cultural zone. The dynasties that controlled them had, in some
cases, a long and distinguished lineage; but a majority emerged out of their
feudatory status.23 It is of course a mistake to assume the continuity of a
kingdom merely because a branch lineage bearing the name of the original
royal family appears in its genealogical records. The family name Chalukya, for
example, was applied to three sets of dynasties; but it would be far fetched to
imagine that the Chalukyas of the eleventh century were the controllers of the
same territory ruled by the Western Chalukyas of the seventh and eighth
centuries.
Each new dynasty wished to acquire full legitimacy in the eyes of the others.
The case of the Gurajara–Pratihara provides a good example of the extraordinary
lengths taken to achieve this. Originally a nomadic and pastoral people, the
Gurjara consciously underwent a major social transformation between the late
sixth and the ninth centuries by assimilating into the Aryan fold, relinquishing
pastoralism and taking up agriculture. The Pratihara became specialised in
military skills, and demonstrated their prowess by keeping a wary check on
the Arabs who had captured Sind in 711. They became the dominant partner.
To call themselves kshatriya, they first underwent, in 747, a major purification
ceremony before a great sacrificial fire on Mount Abu, in the presence of sadhus.
This made them ‘fire-born’ kshatriya Rajputs.24 The Pratihara status among
the monarchs of north India rose greatly from then on. The symbolic ceremony
on Mount Abu was only one of the ways of legitimising their power and social
status. Another was keeping a record for posterity. This was achieved by
claiming genealogical links with the most ancient recorded kshatriya families,
forging marriage links with the existing members of such families, granting
lands to the brahmans as an act of piety, and registering such facts in vamshavalis,
which were the histories of ruling families, or the charitas, which were eulogies
of particular kings. It could be said that, to a certain extent, the genealogical
pedigrees thus constructed by the Pratihara were purposefully fabricated,
intended to enhance their royal status and obliterate their own pastoral and
nomadic origins from popular memory.25
212 Regionalism and feudalism
The Arab mercantile impact
A distinct imperial Arab Muslim identity had been built up by the Umayyad
dynasty which ruled the extensive Islamic Empire between 661 and 750.
Under the Umayyads, Arabic became the standard language of administration
and a uniform Islamic coinage was instituted. From their capital in Damascus,
the Umayyads encouraged trade and enterprise throughout the Islamic world.26
With the capture of Sind in 711 the Arabs gained a most valuable piece of
Indian territory. Sind had become extremely rich through its trading networks,
and, although initially the Arab invaders had raided its vast treasures of gold
and silver, they ensured that the commercial edge of the province was not
blunted. The Umayyads lost power to the Abbasids in 750, and Baghdad
became the new metropolis of the Islamic world. As the centre of Islamic
power shifted from Syria to Iraq the Perso/Arabian Gulf became the vital trade
artery in the Islamic empire.27 Since the Islamic Empire also enjoyed a full
monopoly over the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea routes and a near monopoly in
the Mediterranean, the Muslim merchants came to control most of the world
trade of that era.28 An integrated Islamic trading system was being created
which would shape the global economy almost until the end of the Middle
Ages.29 The products of India were in great demand throughout the Islamic
world; and although India imported certain specialised commodities the
general balance of trade was tipped in her favour, which meant that she received
large quantities of gold and silver bullion from the Muslim merchants. The
gold dinar and the silver dirhem were the dominant currencies in the Abbasid
Empire. The main lands on both sides of the Gulf, Arabia and Persia, were
Abbasid-controlled; and from the ports of the Gulf the Arab and Persian
seamen and merchants took passage to various Indian ports. Whether Arab or
Persian, the Muslim travellers and traders were to be found in small settlements
all along the coast. Sind was already Arab-controlled, so the Muslim influence
could spread more easily. It was from Sind also that many important Indian
intellectual influences flowed towards the Islamic world.30 The ports of Gujarat
contained many Muslim settlers; and both the Rashtrakuta and the local
Gujarati rulers not only facilitated their trade but also provided them with
hospitality, if for no other reason than their own interest in securing a share of
the mercantile profits. The Rashtrakuta kingdom produced teak wood in
quantity that the Arabs needed for shipbuilding.31 Further south, on the
Malabar coast, in the kingdom of Kerala, Muslim traders continued the same
trade once handled by Romans and Persians. Clusters of Muslims were established in Sri Lanka and on both the Coromandel and Bengal coasts. Until about
1000, with the exception of Sind, the Indian interaction with the Arabs was
confined to the sphere of mercantile trade within the coastal ports. And, with
the exception of Kerala, there were hardly any Arabs in the Indian hinterland.
Thus, the Arab impact upon India could not but be marginal, which meant
that there had not existed any general sense of grievance against the Muslims
in this period.
Regionalism and feudalism 213
Commerce and urbanisation
One of the key arguments used for characterising our period as feudal has
traditionally been the notion of commercial decline and deurbanisation. The
historic towns and cities that had developed during the second phase of Indian
urbanisation, between the sixth century bc and the fourth century ad, appeared
to have lost their vitality and importance from the Gupta period onwards. The
principal reason for this was considered to be the drying up of the profitable
Indian trade with Rome and the extreme dearth of coinage. Hiuen Tsang’s
observations of urban decay during his travels in the seventh century are
generally cited as evidence of the increase in ruralisation.32 More recent research
casts doubt upon the validity of this theory of decay. It is no longer believed
that the Roman trade was so fundamental to the well-being of the country that
its disappearance led to an irreparable commercial decline. Commerce never
really died out; it merely changed its orientation. As was referred to earlier, as
well as in the previous chapter, the great appetite for Indian goods in the
Islamic markets and the Arab mercantile role in satiating it meant that the
traditional Indian exports did not cease. The Chinese market remained buoyant
too. There was no shortage of coins because all payments continued to be made
in gold and silver specie. Since, at this time, agricultural production generally
expanded as a result of the opening up of new lands, partly through land grants
and the drafting in of the newly constituted peasant labour, there was ample
surplus for external trade. The epigraphic information concerning the mercantile classes, market centres, interest rates, merchant associations and the rates
of levies and cesses belies greatly the notion of commercial wane.33
Even if we accept that the volume of trade could not have declined in our
period, and that its value might in fact have increased, the issue of urban decay
cannot be easily ignored. Whatever little that archaeology has yielded us from
the post-Gupta sites has indeed confirmed a marked decay in urban architecture,
particularly in north India. The historic cities of the earlier second phase,
having grown from an epicentre, were located in the older imperial territories.
They were centres of political power or of Buddhist patronage, with deep
hinterlands and situated along the main trade routes. With the fading away of
the imperial idea, the decline of Buddhism, the growing importance of the
coastal areas and the opening up of new hinterlands in different regional
kingdoms, it was inevitable that the older cities would suffer decay. But this
decay was not a reflection of a malady affecting the very idea of urbanism in
general; it really was confined to the historic cities, such as Pataliputra and
Taxila; and it did not prevent a new phase of urbanisation in our period. In
fact, it is this third phase of Indian urbanisation, along with the incorporation
of subsequent Islamic notions of urbanism, that gave rise to the pre-modern
towns and cities of the Indian sub-continent (see Map 10.2). The absence of
archaeological confirmation is amply compensated by numerous regional
inscriptional records. They point to a methodology that gives us fresh insights
into the new phase of urbanism.34 We discover that the hierarchy of settlements,
214 Regionalism and feudalism
as symbolised by such terms as grama, pura, nagara or mahanagara, that we
examined in Chapter 5 for example, did not change substantially; and the
Indians of this period were perfectly aware of the differences in urban scale of,
say, a pura settlement and a nagara. Secondly, the details specified in the
charters of land grants give us a spatial context of the land that was being
gifted: whether it was a purely rural space or a mixed rural–urban one. In the
case of the latter, it would include such features as a market exchange point,
residential quarters or manufacturing units. If these predominated in a kingdom’s land grants, then that would allow us to determine the scale of urbanism.
Thirdly, the records tell us about the various types of exchanges and, indeed,
Map 10.2 Important commercial and cultural centres between c. 900 and ad 1200.
Badrinath (CU)
Peoha (CO)
Multan (CO)
Mathura (CO, CU)
Brahmanabad (CO)
Dasapura (CO)
Kanauj (CO)
Debal (CO)
Modhera (CU) Ujjain (CO)
Dwarka (CU)
Somanatha (CU)
Broach (CO)
Pattadakal
(CO, CU) Kohlapur (CO)
Badami (CU)
Sringeri (CU)
Belur (CU)
Sravana
Belgola
(CU)
Cochin (CO)
Quilon (CU)
Warangal (C)
Prayang (CU)
Sanchi (CU)
Kashi (CU)
Nalanda (CU)
Budh Gaya (CU) Khajuraho (CU)
Bhubhaneshwar (CU)
Puri (CU)
Vengi (CO)
Dharanikota (CO)
Nagarjunakonda (CO)
Kanchipuram (CO, CU)
Mamallapuram (CU)
Arikamedu (CO)
Kaveripattinam (CO)
Anuradhapura (CU)
Key
CO = Commercial centre
CU = Cultural centre
200 miles
300 km
SRI
LANKA
NEPAL
Thanjavur (CO, CU)
Gangaikondachalapuram (CU)
Prayag (CU)
Warangai (CO)
Regionalism and feudalism 215
guilds of merchants and craftsmen. The market exchange in north India was
generally called a hatta, and in the south it was the nagaram. The presence of
market exchanges implied an urban population density, and exchanges could
meaningfully continue trade only in the context of urban centres. Both barter
and money were in common use. Fairs too could only be held in some sort of
urban centres, however small.35 Fourthly, the inscriptions give us copious
information about places of pilgrimage and the temples. Our period is profuse
with the northern- and southern-style regional temples; and royal patronages
were continually creating new sacred spaces that drew in people from the
hinterlands. People generally like to live near a great cathedral, a mosque or a
temple, and so it was in this period too; the sacred spaces also represented the
continuity of an older tradition of sacred towns from the very early centuries of
the second phase of Indian urbanisation.36 In conclusion, therefore, we can say
that, although the older towns and cities declined, the newer ones always arose,
and some of these were to become even more bustling and busy during the
following six centuries of the Sultanate and Mogul eras.
Cultural highlights of the age
Shankara, the master philosopher of India
A unique intellectual tradition that guided the philosophers of ancient India
consisted of providing commentaries and reflections upon the Vedas and other
Vedic knowledge. Unlike some of our modern intellectuals, ancient Indian
thinkers were never obsessive about their own original insights or contributions;
rather they took pride in the fact that they were privileged to comment upon
the thoughts of the earlier texts.37 The commentaries became the vehicles
through which, in time, philosophical ideas came to be articulated and gained
maturity. The ideas came to be grouped into several schools that dealt with
such philosophical concepts as epistemology, logic, perception, inference,
ontology, causation or human nature. Six formal schools of thought eventually
came to be recognised: Nyaya, concerned with right reasoning and logic (see
Extract 10.2); Vaisheshika, or atomism, concerned with the method of dealing
with particular matters; Mimamsa, concerned with knowledge proceeding
from Vedic exegesis; Samkhya, a dualistic philosophy concerned with theory of
knowledge and the evolution of the cosmos; Yoga, or practice; and Vedanta, a
metaphysical philosophy which considered itself to be the essence, or ‘end’, of
the Veda and focused its exegesis on the Upanishads.
38
Shankara, or Shankaracharya, perhaps the subtlest Indian thinker of the
ancient world, is considered the greatest exponent of the monist strand of
the Vedanta school.39 Monism is the doctrine of ultimate principle or being
(Brahman), which denies any duality of matter and mind.40 The ideas of the
Vedanta school were derived from the great commentary on the Upanishads,
which was the Brahma Sutra of Badarayana (fifth century bc).41 Shankara,
according to traditional dating, is said to have lived between about 788 and 822
216 Regionalism and feudalism
and wrote a massive commentary in his Brahmasutra Bhashya on Badrayana’s
work. He argued that there was only one non-dual reality (Advaita Vedanta);
that the world was a product of illusion and false appearances, in the way that
ignorant or gullible people mistake a snake for a rope; that the individual Self
can realise the ultimate reality, or Brahman, through the path of knowledge;
and that it is only when the Self has realised the Brahman that the ultimate goal
of human life is reached.42 This purist position stands in contrast to the qualified
non-dualism (Vishisht Advaita) or dualism (Dvaita) stated by later philosophers
such as Ramanuja and Madhava. Shankara’s purist position has attracted most
westernised Indians, and in modern times its popularity has been enhanced by
such figures as Sri Ramakrishna, Swami Vivekananda, Swami Prabhavananda,
Gerald Heard and Christopher Isherwood, who have all promoted the Vedanta
school and its ideas.43 Despite the rigour of his intellectual position, Shankara
was a man who reached out to all groups of people. Although brought up within
the Shaivite atmosphere of a brahman family of Kerala, he influenced the
Vaishnavites too.44 He respected both Buddhists and Jains, although he rejected
their heterodox ideas and regarded ‘Buddhism as Hinduism’s chief enemy’.45
He travelled the length and breadth of India, engaged in lively debates with
thinkers from other schools, and made it his mission to educate the brahman
priests into strict monism. Perhaps imitating the Buddhists, he also founded
four great monasteries, at Badrinath in the north, Sringeri in the south, Puri in
the east, and Dwarka in the west, places still revered by Hindu pilgrims.46
Piety, art and wealth at Ellora
The most concrete expression of Rashtrakuta grandeur that may be physically
witnessed is the world heritage site of the Kailashanatha Temple in Ellora,
Maharashtra. This great Hindu temple, dedicated to Shiva, and representing
his mountain fortress, Kailasha, is the world’s largest single free-standing
structure, carved out of living rock, and covering an area more widespread than
the Parthenon of Athens. The distinguished art historian Percy Brown has
described it as ‘the most stupendous single work of art ever executed in India’47
(see Figure 10.3). His wonderment is perfectly understandable, for there is
nothing in all of Hindu religious art that can compare with the monumentality
of Kailashanatha. It is only one of the thirty-four rock-carved cave temples of
Ellora. Half of them are Hindu caves, twelve are Buddhist and five are Jain.
Kailashanatha is cave number 16, the best known and most visited. A large
number of the cave temples were built in the eighth and the ninth centuries
ad, a time of Rashtrakuta power and dominance in the Deccan. All the great
symbols of Hindu religion and religiosity are represented in the images of the
temple,48 and, for this, nearly 3 million cubic metres of rock had to be excavated
from the cliff – a stupendous effort.49 The temple, which is still standing, and
protected by UNESCO funds,50 is a tribute to both the vision and the
imagination of the Rashtrakuta king Krishna I, his chief builder and the
craftsmanship of masons and labourers of the eighth century.
Regionalism and feudalism 217
Language and literature
Sanskrit continued, during this period, to be the language of courtly, refined
and elite literature. Irrespective of regions, there was much royal patronage of
Sanskrit poets and dramatists. The latter experimented with a new style of
writing, called Champu, a mixture of prose and verse, particularly popular with
monarchs, whose praises were sung sometimes in a sycophantic manner.51
Figure 10.3 Tourist Sam Badni on the upper gallery of Ellora (private family photo).
218 Regionalism and feudalism
Unfortunately, much of the secular literature was far too stylised, pedantic or
didactic, and lacked ‘specificity with details of time, place and person’,52 thus
betraying a distinct lack of originality (see Extract 10.3). There was, however,
an important exception, which was in the area of poetic theory. A number of
literary critics had, in the past, explored the characteristics of Sanskrit poetry
in terms of figures of speech, style or sheer aesthetic pleasure. In the ninth
century, however, a critic known as Anandavardhana analysed a new element
in poetry, which he termed Dhvani or suggestiveness. In his famous work
Dhvanyaloka, he stated that all poetic work is endowed with three powers: that
of denoting in a factual way, of implying something obliquely, or by suggesting
an imaginative vista.53 His work was further refined by the Kashmiri philosopher Abhinavagupta (975–1025); and the Dhvani theory of suggestiveness was
recognised by the distinguished French critic Jacques Lacan as particularly
valuable for his work in psychoanalysis.54
Some innovative work apart, there were ominous signs for the future of
Sanskrit in our period. Just as at one time Prakrit languages such as Pali,
Sauraseni, Magadhi and Maharashtri acquired their own autonomy, so after
the Prakrits a new phase set in along the development of Indian languages,
called Apabrahmasha.
55 The term signified decadence born out of change. Those
Sanskrit authors for whom the language was so perfect and so well defined
viewed any change in its usage as a decline in standards. And yet it was through
the medium of the Apabrahmasha languages that the various regional languages
of India evolved their own literatures. While voluminous literature had of
course existed in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Tamil, the development of other
regional literatures took place over a period of nearly 700 years after the eighth
century ad. During the time-span of this chapter it was a Dravidian regional
language, Kannada/Kanarese, which first acquired a literature of its own. It
borrowed heavily in style and form from Sanskrit, but it was distinct in its own
right, exploring themes and issues within the social and political parameters of
Karnataka. The first great literary figure in Kannada was the Rashtrakuta king
Amoghavarsha (ad 814–80), who wrote an important manual of poetic theory,
Kavirajamarga, in which he laid down certain critical tests, with examples, by
which the greatness of a poem could be judged.56
Pala patronage of Buddhism
The Palas were strongly Buddhist; and one might say that under their patronage Buddhism obtained its last chance to retain its influence in India before a
newly resurgent Hinduism finally crushed it. Buddhist institutions and endowments proliferated under Dharamapala, Devapala and other Palas. Buddhist
scholars, travellers and visitors came from all the places where the Buddha was
revered: Sind, Kashmir, Ceylon and Nepal within the sub-continent; Burma,
Laos and the Indonesian islands; and China and Tibet. King Dharamapala
continued to support the great Buddhist monastic and educational institute at
Nalanda, while building another centre of higher learning at Vikramshila on
Regionalism and feudalism 219
the banks of the Ganga in Bihar.57 While to this latter centre came many
Tibetan scholars, Nalanda continued to attract monks and students from
Southeast Asia.58
The most important power in Southeast Asia during the heyday of the Palas
was that of the Shailendra dynasty, which ruled over the Malay peninsula and
the Indonesian archipelago, including Sumatra, Java, Bali and Borneo. The
Shailendras were the followers of Mahayana Buddhism and derived their
religious inspiration from Bengal, which was then the chief centre of the
Mahayana and Tantric traditions. They had extensive diplomatic relations with
the Palas, and there was much cultural traffic between Pala Bengal and the
Shailendra Empire. The most important symbol in stone of the cosmic system
of Mahayana Buddhism is the great temple of Borobudur in Java. Apart from
Buddhism, the Southeast Asians generally borrowed many elements of Indian
culture. However, they did so in a proactive manner rather than as passive
colonial subjects. Using their own originality and genius, they changed it
sufficiently to make it a natural part of their landscape, environment and
personality.59 This is the reason why Indian cultural imprints and forms which
still exist there are not regarded by the populace as an alien cultural burden.
They adhere to this particular heritage with pride because it has become an
integral part of their native cultures.
Indian scientific influence at Baghdad
The most important centre of intellectual life in the Islamic world during this
period was Baghdad. The Abbasid rulers of that city soon realised that their
people had only a rudimentary knowledge of such sciences as astronomy,
mathematics and medicine. They looked to India and Persia for enlightenment.
Two independent Arab writers, Ibn al-Adami and Abu Mashar, have recorded
the visit of Kanaka, an Indian astronomer-mathematician and diplomat from
Sind, at the court of the Caliph Al-Mansur (754–75). With his curiosity in
Indian astronomy and mathematics greatly aroused by the visitor, the caliph
ordered two scholars, Ibrahim al-Fazari and Yaqub ibn Tariq, to translate the
two critical works of Brahmagupta (late sixth century), Brahmasphutasiddhanta
and Khandakhadyaka. Through the resulting Arabic translations, known as
Sindhind and Arkand, the knowledge of Indian numerals passed on to the
Islamic world60 (see Figure 10.4). Similarly, the Persian astronomical tables,
known as Zig-I shahriyarr, which were influenced by Indian astronomy, were
translated into Arabic under the title of Zijashshahriyar.
61 The ninth-century
scholar al-Khwarizmi learnt Sanskrit and explained to his readers the Indian
system of notation, and through his work the internationalisation of the Indian
number system began.62 Another scholar from the same century, al-Kindi,
wrote four books on Indian numerals. Indian medical methods and drugs were
also in great demand in the Islamic world. A large number of Sanskrit medical,
pharmacological and toxicological texts were translated into Arabic under the
patronage of Khalid, the vizier of Al-Mansur. Khalid was the son of a chief
220 Regionalism and feudalism
priest of a Buddhist monastery in Balkh. Some of his family were killed when
the Arabs captured Balkh; others, including Khalid, survived by converting to
Islam. They were to be known as the Barmakis of Baghdad, who were fascinated
by new ideas from India.63 Indian medical knowledge was given a further boost
under the caliph Harun ar-Rashid (788–809), who ordered the translation of
Susruta Samhita into Arabic. A great Arabic medical text of the late ninth and
tenth centuries, Kitab al-hawi, translated into Latin as late as the thirteenth
century and known as Liber continens, was written by al-Razi, or Rhazes (865–
925), who embodied much Indian knowledge in that work.
Welcoming the adherents of non-Indic faiths
By the year 1000, in addition to the Hindus, Buddhists and Jains, the adherents
of four Middle Eastern faiths had settled in diverse parts of India. The Arab
Muslims were the largest group, and, excepting their conquest of Sind, they
took up trading and maritime occupations. They had few inhibitions about
arranging temporary marriages (muta) with Indian women;64 and, although
initially they did not go out of their way to convert the Indians, they made sure
that their offspring considered themselves Muslim. Perhaps the first authentic
group of Indian Muslims were the Mapillas of Kerala, descendants of the Arab
merchants and Keralan women from marine and fishing castes. The steady
process of Brahmanisation in Kerala was, at that time, leading to an increasing
emphasis within the Hindu population on purification rites and caste rituals,
resulting in the exclusion of the majority from maritime activities. This gave
Figure 10.4 The Gwalior numerals (by permission of Dr George Joseph).
Regionalism and feudalism 221
the Mapillas a unique opportunity to control harbours and long-distance
shipping routes. The profits they made not only yielded tax revenues for the
Hindu kings of Kerala, but also helped them to carve out a distinct place for
themselves within Keralan society65 (see Extract 10.4).
Kerala was also the place where a visible Christian presence had been evident
for several hundred years. According to a commonly held Keralan tradition,
the earliest Christian church was established by St Thomas, the apostle of
Christ, in ad 52.66 Doubts felt by the Western Christians about this claim
have centred upon two issues: the lack of written testimony and the hazards of
long sea journeys. Modern historical research into the many oral traditions
within the Kerala church has put the first doubt to rest. Also, since Roman and
Egyptian ships were trading regularly with Kerala in the first century ad,
there was no reason why St Thomas could not have travelled on one of those
ships. The Kerala church had no direct contacts with Rome; in fact, from the
fourth century onwards, its main link with the Christian world was through
the mer chants and immigrants who came to Kerala in Persian trading ships.
Many of them were West Asian and Levantine Nestorian Christians who owed
allegiance to the Persian state, and whose prelates and bishops lived in the
Persian Empire of the Sasanians. Their liturgy was in the Syriac language, a
variant of Aramaic, the language of Christ and his apostles.67 It is through this
Levantine connection that the St Thomas church came to be known as the
Syrian church.68 While these Christian immigrants helped to familiarise the
Syrian church with the various revisionist dogmas of Christianity that were
convulsing Europe and the Middle East during the first Christian millennium,
the essential strength of the church lay in the numbers of converted natives. A
regular series of conversions of some of the most high-caste and influential
brahman families of Kerala not only provided numerical strength but also
helped to Indianise this church in a way realised by no other Christian church
in India.69 In the period covered by this chapter, the most reliable documentary
evidence of the influence of the St Thomas church comes from three inscriptions
on the so-called Tarisapalli Copper Plates of the year 849. The inscriptions
record a set of privileges granted to the Syrian church at Quilon by the then
local ruler, placing the Christians on an equal footing with the Hindus of
Kerala.70
As with the Christians, it was again Kerala that was the main hosting society
for the followers of yet another Middle Eastern faith: Judaism. The Keralan
hospitality went back, according to Indian and Jewish traditions, to 1000 bc,
when King Solomon’s fleet was supposed to have traded in Indian waters.71
The Jews were in Kerala at the time of Christ; and, again according to tradition,
thousands of Jews landed at Muziris after the destruction of the second temple
of Jerusalem by the Romans in ad 70. The most substantial Jewish migration
to Kerala, however, came about through the agency of the Islamic Empire
from the eighth century onwards.72 Jewish traders and entrepreneurs, whether
domi ciled in Damascus, Baghdad or Cairo, facilitated a huge amount of
commerce within that empire.73 Their agents and mariners also came to Kerala,
222 Regionalism and feudalism
where many later settled, seeking goods produced in south India and Southeast
Asia, in exchange for some of the luxury products from other parts of the
empire. The Chera rulers of Kerala appreciated the financial gains and economic
activity generated by the Jews: the Jewish Copper Plate of the year 1000 carries
a num ber of inscriptions which list the various privileges and gifts granted by
a local ruler, Bhaskara Ravi Varmana, to the Jewish community leader, Joseph
Rabban.74
With the introduction of Islam in Persia after the Arab victory there in 641,
the state religion of Zoroastrianism was left rudderless. While the mass of the
Persian people abandoned their Zoroastrian faith for Islam out of both fear and
expediency, substantial numbers of staunch Zoroastrians continued to survive
there during the next few centuries. Their position fluctuated between extreme
vulnerability and insecure co-existence with the Muslims.75 According to a
tradition recorded in India in the sixteenth century, a band of these Zoroastrians,
from the Khorasan province of Iran (i.e. Parthia), landed on the Gujarat coast
near Sanjan as refugees in 716. It is, however, more likely that they came as late
as 936, when they were welcomed by a local ruler, Jadi Rana, who, most
probably, was a feudatory of the Rashtrakuta king.76 The Parsis, as they have
come to be called by the Gujaratis, have lived in India ever since as a minuscule
but distinct faith community.

The eleventh and twelfth centuries witnessed a massive ransacking of north
Indian wealth by Turco-Afghan warriors and marauders. The small Rajput
kingdoms, successors to the mighty Gurjara–Pratihara kingdom of the two
earlier centuries, were in a constant state of insecurity engendered by this rising
menace. The raids were, in one sense, a curtain raiser to what was to happen in
ad 1206. In that year Qutb-ud-din Aybak, a slave general, established his own
slave dynasty at Delhi, where he constructed the famous Qutb mosque and
minar. His was the first of the five dynasties that are collectively known as the
Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526). The 1206 victory of the Turco-Afghans was to
presage nearly 600 years of Muslim political authority and influence over a
large part of India, and the Muslims, like the Arabs previously, also pulled
India into the economic constellation of the Islamic world up until the coming
of the European powers. Yet while the Turkish plunder of the north was at its
height, the south flourished under the great Hindu Chola dynasty; when the
Cholas declined other Hindu kingdoms such as the Hoysala and Vijayanagara
took their place. While the fabulous wealth of the north Indian cities and
temples was being drained away to Afghanistan, south Indian wealth was at
the same time increasing phenomenally through the commercial and maritime
endeavours of the Cholas. South India remained obstinately Hindu, even while
Muslim power and authority were spreading there through the future centuries.
This is just one example of the complex plurality of India that makes nonsense
of periodising Indian history on the basis of religion (see Map 11.1).
The source material for the history of the two centuries lies in thousands of
inscriptions relating to the Cholas and other smaller kingdoms. Contemporary
historical biographies, chronicles and vamshavalis, or historical records of
dynastic genealogies, are also sources of much useful information to students of
this period. Arabic and Persian records provide many details about the Turks’
domination and the Islamic influences. There is no shortage of material for
primary researchers and scholars to probe and analyse, and new interpretations
are always forthcoming as more material is closely studied. There are also two
very important contemporary accounts that are particularly instructive in their
different ways. One is the historical survey of Kashmir, the Rajatarangini,
written by Kalhana, who attempted to provide a systematic historical study of
228 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
a regional kingdom. Balanced and readable, it comes nearest to our modern
perspectives on historical writing. The other, from among the many foreign
sources of information, is the most useful and penetrating account of India by
the Central Asian scholar Al-Biruni, who accompanied Mahmud of Ghazni
and spent ten years in India.
State and society under the Cholas
The eastern seaboard of southern India is known as the Coromandel coast, the
term derived from the Cola-Mandalam. On this coast and in its fertile hinterland
Map 11.1 Major Indian kingdoms of the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
200 miles
300 km
SRI
LANKA
NEPAL
Battles
of Tarain
KASHMIR
TOMARAS
CHAHAMANAS
CHANDELLAS
KALACHURIS
KAKATIYAS
CHALUKYA/
SOLANKI
CHERAS
PANDYAS
CHOLAS
CHOLAS
EASTERN
CHALUKYAS
CHALUKYAS
OF KALYANI
EASTERN
GANGAS
PALAS
SENAS PARMARAS
KAMARUPA
PRATIHARAS
GAHADAVALAS ARAB SIND
HINDU-SHAHIS
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 229
a Tamil-speaking people, the Cholas, established a south Indian state with a
particular identity and style of governance for nearly three centuries. Although
mentioned, along with the Pandyas and the Cheras, in the Sangam literature
of the Tamils dating back to the beginning of the Christian era, the Cholas
emerged as a substantial power only in the late ninth century when they
defeated the Pallavas. By the early tenth century the Cholas ruled practically
the whole of the far south, excepting the Chera kingdom in Kerala. One of the
important reasons for their ascendancy was the prosperity of their agriculture,
based on the technology of efficient sluices in irrigating the land.1
 Their
supremacy, however, came to be resented by the Rashtrakuta, who inflicted a
crushing defeat on them in 949. The rest of the tenth century saw the Cholas in
a state of steady decline, and it seemed that they were past their peak.2
 The
picture, however, changed dramatically with the accession of a dynamic king,
Rajaraja I, in 985.
Three great Chola kings
Rajaraja I (985–1012) was the first great leader of the Cholas. Under him they
adopted a highly aggressive posture against their smaller neighbours such as
the Pandyas, the Cheras and the rulers of Sri Lanka, basically for economic
reasons. Rajaraja also attacked the Chalukyas of Kalyani, who had supplanted
the Rashtrakuta in the Deccan. History, however, would have been less than
kind to him if bloody warfare had been his sole achievement. In fact, he is
considered as a king who solidified Chola identity through an elaborate royal
administration and bureaucracy, along with the promotion of the cult of godking at an iconic temple that he built at Thanjavur.3
 His son, Rajendra I
(1012–44), was equally dynamic. It was in his reign that Chola imperialism
asserted itself powerfully. All of Sri Lanka was conquered, and control in south
India was consolidated more fully than before. It was the north, however, that
particularly fascinated Rajendra. The lure of the lands of Aryavarta, and the
powerful symbolism of the holy River Ganga, meant that Rajendra, a great
southern ruler, had to tame the north to become a universal ruler. His territorial
ambition rashly led him to send an expedition to the Pala kingdom of Bengal;
and, although it did not really gain him any material benefits, he nevertheless
turned it into a symbolic triumph by ordering his commanders to bring back
jars of water from the River Ganga, so that he could claim token ownership
of the ancient land of Aryavarta. At Gangaikondacholapuram he built a
magnificent temple, surrounded by a huge lake, called Chola-Ganga. Rajendra
also sent a naval expedition to the kingdom of Sri Vijaya (southern Malay
peninsula, Java and Sumatra) to protect the existing India–China trade route
across the Malay Straits.4
 The Chola rulers continued to enjoy the gains made
under Rajaraja I and Rajendra I, and in the reign of Kulottunga I (1070–1118)
the Chola kingdom reached new heights of prosperity and maturity. The
kingdom became the symbol of southern classicism, and the cultural levels
achieved at that time became the benchmarks for southern culture in general.
230 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
The Chola kingdom survived for about a hundred years after 1118; but from
the early thirteenth century onwards it came under great pressure from not
only the new Deccan kingdom of the Hoysalas but, more severely, from its
older rivals, the Pandyas of Madurai.5
Royal authority and local autonomy in a regional kingdom: the
Chola model
By any criterion, the Chola kingdom of the eleventh century was one of the
great political structures of India, if not the world. The organisation of that
kingdom was based on sound principles of administration and management,
the evidence for which lies in detailed inscriptions and revenue records. A
valuable set of inscriptions, discovered as late as 1905, and consisting of 816
lines of writing on thirty-one sheets of copper bound together, along with a
seal-ring, is the so-called Order (or sasanam) of King Rajendra I. The purpose
of this copper plate was to record the transfer of a grant to brahmans in a
particular village to the temple itself. However, the recording of the event is
perhaps not as important as the eulogy to the Chola rulers and the articulation
of Chola grandeur; it expresses the belief that the space the Cholas ruled was
the ‘sphere of a world ruler’.6
 All the early historical studies came to the
conclusion that the success of the kingdom lay in the exercise of powerful royal
authority through a firm bureaucracy.7
 The monarchs of the calibre of Rajaraja
I and Rajendra I provided the role models for royal authority in action.
This particular understanding of the Chola royal authority came to be
challenged, in time, by what has come to be known as the segmentary state
theory, proposed by a group of American historians led by Burton Stein, whose
research interests lay in comparative studies of rural societies. We have already
referred to this theory in relation to the Pallavas, but it is necessary to restate
some of its positions because the Cholas more or less continued the traditions
of the Pallavas. The segmentary state theory argued that in the feudal world of
the eleventh century the Chola king did not truly exercise political sovereignty
throughout his kingdom; his real political power was confined to the central
core area, while in all the outer areas the king exercised only ritual or symbolic
authority. True power actually lay with the assemblies of agricultural microregions called nadus (referred to in the previous chapter) or with the brahman
lords and local chiefs who had received land grants from the king for varied
reasons. The king did not control a central system of taxation or a central army.
If he wished to raise resources, more often than not, the Chola king launched
plunder raids on the neighbouring states. It was further argued that both the
Pallavas and the Cholas built temples as a means of reaffirming their ritual
sovereignty in the peripheral areas; the sponsoring of temples was a way of
keeping the brahman elites compliant, thus preventing any disruption to their
nominal authority.8
Further extensive research in Tamil records has, in turn, led a more recent
group of historians to challenge the ideas of the segmentary state theory. The
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 231
notion that the Chola kings held merely ritual sovereignty outside their core
area of Cholamandalam is rejected on the grounds that they in fact made subtle
use of the existing institutions to integrate their kingdom rather than allow
the institutions to go their own way. These institutions were, respectively, the
brahmadeya, the nagaram and the temple.9
 None of them was permitted to
displace the nadu, which remained the basic agricultural unit; but the nadu’s
power was significantly moderated by them. Through their land grants to the
brahmans, the Chola kings extensively encouraged the creation of brahmadeyas,
10
which had the potential for raising agricultural productivity and the general
income of the kingdom. The brahmadeya elites were also to be the eyes and ears
of the king. The nagaram was the market centre and a place where powerful
commercial organisations and merchant guilds,11 such as a body called
Ayyavole 500, operated (see Extract 11.1); the kings realised that they too
were creators of wealth, and ensured that the nadu assemblies did not in any
way hinder their work. Since a nagaram might serve a number of nadus, no one
particular nadu could impose arbitrary levies on the merchants. The temple,
the third institution, was more than a place of worship for the Chola kings.12 It
held great commercial and economic advantage for them. Vast donations were
made to the temple by rich and poor, and huge quantities of foodstuffs were
moved into the temple precincts from the hinterland. The temple could thus
act as a threshold for the king’s intervention in the countryside. The temple,
with its iconography and its sacred space for the Shivalingam, for example, was
the central arena where the king, through his enormous powers of patronage,
could demonstrate more than ritual sovereignty. Chola centralism also effectively institutionalised the various religious cults associated with the popular
bhakti movement in south India, and temple patronage was a key element in
this aspect of the imperium.13 The temple proclaimed to the world the Chola
state’s ideology.14 Additionally, the Chola kings did not permit the nadus to
remain stationary and unchanging. The nadus were not just places where all
property was to be communally held. Various types of private ownership were
being encouraged by the royal officials. Continual reorganisations, mergers
and rationalisations were effected, and larger revenue or political units, called
valanadu, periyanadu or tanyiur, were being created for the purpose of defining
and redefining agricultural regions and revenue organisation by the will of a
royal authority.15 Once again the central bureaucracy was gaining ascendancy
over the local rights of the nadus. With three different versions of the nature of
Chola authority that we have summarised, no wonder this kingdom continues
to fascinate the modern-day students of history.
The international context of Chola commercial prosperity
The ancient maritime commerce of south India was profoundly affected by two
economically significant developments in the eleventh century. One was the
displacement, within the Islamic economic world, of the Abbasid Empire
based in Baghdad by the Fatimids of Egypt based in Cairo. In consequence, the
232 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
trading links between the ports of the Persian Gulf and the once Rashtrakutacontrolled ports of western India became severed. Under the Fatimids the trade
with the Red Sea ports provided greater incentive to the merchants of the far
south of India.16 The Keralan coast was thereby set to gain at the expense of the
Karnataka coast. The Chola king Rajaraja I’s expansionist hold over Sri Lanka,
the Maldive Islands and the Chera kingdom of Kerala was part of the ongoing
effort by the Cholas to ensure that their merchants were not disadvantaged.
The second critical economic development was the enormous commercial opening up of China under the Sung dynasty. At that time China was undergoing a
profound economic transformation.17 She was several centuries ahead of any
other part of the world in the fields of steel manufacture, the armaments sector,
transportation networks and techniques, the management of credits and
finance, and specialisation of production. Hundreds of Chinese commodities
were entering the international market owing to the rapid expansion of her
merchant marine under the Sungs. The rise of the prosperous consumer society
in China led to huge amounts of imports from India, such as raw cotton and
manufactured textiles (in which China was, at this stage, far behind India),
spices and drugs, ivory, amber, coral, rhinoceros horn, aromatics and perfumes;
it resulted in China running up a large balance of trade deficit. To a considerable
extent, the Indian merchants’ prosperity depended upon the goodwill of the
rulers of Sri Vijaya, a Malay kingdom that straddled the Malay peninsula and
the Indonesian island of Sumatra and controlled the Malacca Straits. This key
waterway passage is today one of the most important international shipping
lanes, as it was in the eleventh century. The Indian merchant marine used this
waterway to shorten the journey from the southern ports of India to China. In
order to increase their share of the profits from the India–China trade and its
customs dues, etc., the Sri Vijaya authorities decided that all ships had to
terminate their journeys in the straits and that their middlemen would transship the goods to their respective destinations. This was much too irksome for
the merchant organisations in the Chola state, and Rajendra I decided to use
his substantial naval force to punish Sri Vijaya. There was no imperial motive
for this; it was solely a matter of safeguarding the shipping lane for the
Chola-sponsored mer chant fleet. The close relationship between the Chola
state and the merchants’ organisations depended upon sufficiently assured
royal protection.18
Turco-Afghan incursions into north India
We have referred, in the two previous chapters, to both the Arab invasion of
Sind and the Arab mercantile presence on the west coast of India. The Muslim
influence in India between about 700 and 1000 was limited and not particularly
resented. During the next two centuries, however, we see the beginnings of the
fear and paranoia engendered within the Indian psyche by the emergence of a
new type of Muslim migrant: the nomadic Turco-Afghan warrior. Before we
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 233
examine his impact let us first briefly review the north Indian political scene as
it existed around the year ad 1000.
Regional kingdoms of north India
Nearly twenty north Indian regional kingdoms were in existence during this
period, but a few of them deserve to be especially noted. They may be grouped
as follows. Of the two substantial Himalayan kingdoms of Kashmir and Nepal,
Kashmir was more important than the latter, and, as outlined in Chapter 9, its
famous earlier leader, Lalitditya Muktapida, had briefly wielded power over
Madhyadesha and Kanauj in the eighth century. It occupied, as it still does
today, a highly strategic geographical zone that acted as a link route between
India and the surrounding countries of Tibet, Nepal, China and Central Asia;
and it also lay along one of the great trade routes between these countries.19
Nepal had been intermittently in contact with India since before the Mauryan
times, but was greatly affected by stressful relations between Bengal and Tibet.20
Next, we have a group of Rajput kingdoms. In addition to the Gurjara–Pratihara,
a number of Rajput dynastic kingdoms were spread out across the northern
plains and the central regions.21 In Madhyadeha and surrounding areas such as
Bundelkhand, the successors to the Gurjara–Prati haras were the dynasties of
the Gahadavalas, Kalachuris and Chandellas. The last-mentioned was particularly lustrous in its glory. A tour around the Khajuraho temples, built under the
patronage of the Chandellas, should be enough to dispel any notion that a small
Indian kingdom in this period lacked wealth or flair. Further west, there was
another cluster of four Rajput kingdoms, including those of the Chahamanas or
the Chauhanas of eastern Rajasthan, the Tomaras of the Delhi region, the
Parmaras of Malwa and western Madhya Pradesh, and the Chalukyas (not to be
confused with the Deccan Chalukyas) or Solankis of Gujarat. The Chahamanas
were the final bulwarks of defence against the Ghurid invaders, and the tragic
fate of their brave king, Prithviraja Chauhan, evokes great emotion among
many Indians. Still further to the west, there was the kingdom of Sind, occupied
by the Arabs since 711; but in the northwest and along the frontier area, and
earlier extending deep into Afghan istan, there was also a small kingdom of the
so-called Hindu Shahis. Originally they had been the rulers of Kabul and the
surrounding area where there were many Buddhists too. It needs to be remembered that both Brahmanism and Buddhism had a strong presence in Afghanistan before Islam. By the time of the Islamic penetration of Afghanistan, the
Hindu Shahi rulers had transferred to the Punjab; they were the first of the
Indian rulers to be destroyed by the Gaznavid conquerors. At the opposite end
of the map, in Bengal, the great Pala dynasty was nearing its end by the middle
of the eleventh century; and from 1080 onwards the Sena dynasty was to control
Bengal. Further to the northeast there existed the Assamese kingdom of
Kamarupa, which, like Nepal, had not only come under the influence of Brahmanism and Aryanisation but was also facing pressures from the rulers of Bengal.22
234 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
The background to the Turco-Afghans
After having defeated the Sasanians the Arab armies sped towards the northern
and northeastern frontiers of Iran. Beyond these frontiers lay the terrain of the
nomadic Turkic-speaking tribes of Central Asia, which had, throughout their
history, faced constant harrying over land and land rights from their various
neighbours and enemy confederations and, above all, from the Mongols.
Migrating into Iran and Afghanistan had been their traditional response;
however, after these countries came under the control of the Abbasid rulers of
Baghdad from the mid-eighth century onwards, these migrants came to be
seen in a different light.23 The Abbasids and their client rulers saw in them a
ready supply of ‘slave’ soldiers for their armies. Bought as children, they were
given military training for service initially against the Mongols but also against
other enemies of the Islamic Empire. They were taught the skills of archery
and horsemanship. Although remaining slaves, they could rapidly rise within
the ranks of the army, suffering little in the way of racial discrimination. Since
they had embraced Islam, their status was higher than that of slaves, but they
could not easily leave the army. They won rapid recognition in the Islamic
Empire; in time, they became as ardent defenders of Islam as the Arabs had
been earlier. At the same time, however, there was the danger that the various
groups of these soldiers would complot in rebellions against the Abbasid
caliphs, thereby gravely weakening the integrity of the Islamic Empire.
Mahmud of Ghazni’s raids
A hundred miles southwest of Kabul there lie today the ruins of Ghazni, which,
in the tenth century, had been a part of the Samanid Empire of Iran. In 933, a
Turkish slave of the Samanids, Alptigin, in the rebellious way many slave
soldiers behaved, seized the lands around the town and established a small
kingdom there. In turn, another risen slave, Sabuktigin, who served in
Alptigin’s army, instead of rebelling against his master, contrived to marry his
daughter. On the death in 977 of his father-in-law and master, Sabuktigin
became the king of Ghazni, while continuing to offer nominal allegiance to
the Samanids. Thus was established the Ghaznavid dynasty, which lasted from
977 to 1186.24 Sabuktigin’s major military achievement was to weaken the
Indian kingdom of the Hindu Shahis, who controlled the lands east of Kabul,
including the Punjab. By the time he died, in 997, he had exposed the vulnerability of the kings of northwest India. His son, Mahmud, who ruled from 997
to1030, pressed his advantage further against the Hindu Shahis, whose ruler,
Jayapala, preferred suicide by self-immolation rather than humiliating
subjection by paying a ransom to Mahmud. With Jayapala’s demise, Mahmud’s
confidence grew, and for the next quarter century he launched seventeen
separate raids deep into northwestern and northern India. Neither the Gurjara–
Pratihara nor the other Rajput kingdoms deterred Mahmud, partly because
his strategy was simply to carry out lightning raids on cities, temples and
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 235
monasteries rather than engage the Indian forces in set-piece battles. The bulky
Indian armies, more accustomed to conventional static warfare, were no match
for Mahmud’s mobile horsemen recruited from among the varied Turkic and
Afghan ethnic groups. Mahmud avoided the temptation of permanent
conquests even after he had taken the city of Kanauj, the capital of the Pratihara
kingdom, in 1019. He was focused, basically, on ensuring a secure position for
his city of Ghazni within the nomadic milieu that he knew best, which was the
Turco-Afghan political and social world; his raids into India were just a means
to achieving this end. The transfer of Indian wealth to the treasury of Ghazni
was Mahmud’s key motive, because only with money could he continue to
secure the support for the Ghaznavids among the chiefs and warlords. Some of
his ill-gotten wealth was spent on a spate of constructions in Ghazni, with the
building of libraries, mosques and palaces. Most of the bullion was minted
down for the purpose of financing more trade.25 The Indians had accrued their
wealth through centuries of profitable trade balances with other countries; but
this wealth was now scattered in West Asia. The economic damage for India
was limited, because Indian international trade continued to be buoyant.
Mahmud’s Islamic iconoclasm that was given vent in his plunder of temples
was, however, something that is still alive in Indian memories.
The Ghurid conquest of north India
The Ghaznavid raids did not cease after Mahmud’s death in 1030. The economy
of Ghazni depended upon the continuous supply of funds from India, and it
became ever more necessary to attack the wealthy cities of Madhyadesha, such
as Kanauj and Benares.26 Although Ghazni itself faced a major challenge in the
mid-twelfth century from the nearby province of Ghur, the Indian vulnerability
to Turco-Afghan attacks remained constant. Situated between Ghazni and
Herat, the territory of Ghur was ruled by a local Iranian/Tajik family of
Shansabanis, who, though initially subordinate to the Ghaznavids, began to
encroach upon Ghazni from the 1150s onwards. By 1186 their control over the
city was complete when two brothers in the family, Ghiyasuddin Muhammad
and Muzuddin Muhammad, seized all power there.27 By agreement within the
family, Muzuddin became the king of Ghazni – in the Indian context, he is
generally known as Muhammad Ghuri. The financial depredation of the Indian
lands was a temptation that Muhammad Ghuri could not resist; however, his
ambition was not just to raid, but also to annex lands. He evolved new military
strategies and introduced a number of innovations in the army.28 The cavalry,
with their well-mounted archers, was widely introduced. The army recruited
from a broader range of ethnic groups with military skills, such as the
Damghanis of northern Iran, the Tajiks, and the Seljuq and Ghuzz Turks. Two
separate units, the advance guards and the reserve forces, were formed in every
Ghurid army. The slave soldiers were granted the highest privileges in
Muhammad’s army, as their military prowess was recognised. Muhammad also
decided to streamline the procedures for the procurement of foodstuffs by
236 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
attaching officially recognised grain dealers and pastoralists, later known as
banjaras, who, with their massive bullock carts, ensured steady supplies for his
mobile forces.29 With his preparations complete, Muhammad Ghuri launched
a massive attack, through the Punjab, into the territories of the Chahamana
kingdom in 1191, but was repulsed with great losses by its ruler, Prithviraja
Chauhan. It is remembered as the first battle of Tarain. The second battle of
Tarain was fought the very next year, but this time Prithviraja and his army
were completely overwhelmed by the Ghurid forces. Prithviraja was taken
prisoner and executed. Many reasons have been advanced for the latter’s
defeat,30 but a few need to be especially noted. Prithviraja was a traditional
Rajput ruler, steeped in the heroic traditions of his people and dependent upon
the feudal levies;31 but these were notoriously unreliable in comparison with
the permanently committed centralised Turkish standing armies.32 The Indian
forces had huge numbers of poorly armed and poorly positioned infantrymen
who just could not withstand the cavalry charges of the Turco-Afghans.33
Prithviraja had asked for help from the other Rajput rulers, but none of them
felt particularly threatened from across the border at the time and thus failed
to come to his assistance, betraying a grave lack of foresight and reliable
military intelligence. And at least one Rajput ruler – Jayachandra of Kanauj –
was so jealous of Prithviraja that he is even supposed to have invited and
encouraged Muhammad Ghuri.34 If Prithviraja had followed up his first victory
by pursuing Muhammad, the latter might have been sufficiently intimidated
not to return; but Prithviraja’s complacency and inaction led to his undoing at
the second crucial battle. After Prithviraja there was no credible north Indian
ruler who could withstand the Ghurids. The Ganga valley and Madhyadesha
fell into Turco-Afghan hands within a few years; and the smaller kingdoms of
the Ghadavalas and Chandellas lost all real authority in the province (see Map
11.2). Between 1197 and 1205 a non-slave commander of the Ghurid army,
Bakhtiyar Khalji, conquered Bihar and Bengal. Although Muhammad Ghuri
himself was assassinated in 1206, probably for Islamic sectarian reasons, the
Turco-Afghan hold over north India could not be shaken. It was just as well for
the slave captains of Muhammad Ghuri, because in Ghur itself a new Iranian
power of the Khwarizm Shah was coming to the fore. With Ghur fallen, what
remained to the Ghurid slave generals was the north Indian heartland that
they had conquered. In 1206 Qutb-ud-din Aybak, Muhammad Ghuri’s
faithful slave general, became the first king of the slave dynasty and inaugurated
the Delhi Sultanate (1206–1526).
Evaluating the Turkish impact
The Central Asian Turks were a people whose nomadism was to dominate the
socio-cultural milieu of the Islamic Empire and the Middle East in general.35
The trend towards nomadism was further accelerated when the greatest of all
the nomads of Inner Asia, the Mongols, swooped down upon the Islamic
Empire and crushed the Abbasids forever. Baghdad, the queen of Islamic cities,
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 237
was destroyed in 1258, with vast numbers of her people being put to death. A
number of factors, however, prevented the triumph of nomadism in India.36
Here, firstly, the Indian peasantry remained the foundation of the sedentary
lifestyle, and the attacking Turco-Afghans learnt to respect the immutable
ways of the peasants and their toil on the land. Secondly, the invaders came to
appreciate the rich variety of Indian trades, crafts and occupations, only made
possible by complex networks of kinship and caste arrangements so unique to
India. While militarily triumphant, the Turco-Afghans nevertheless had to
make compromises with Indian realities, and over time they became integrated
in Indian society. Through their Delhi Sultanate they were eventually to
become the greatest bulwark in the defence of India against the Mongols.37
Over the sensitive issue of religion, the picture is mixed for the eleventh and
twelfth centuries. Muslims generally have a proclivity to convert the nonMuslim, but in those two centuries there was hardly any conversion by the
Turco-Afghans. Whatever conversion was taking place was in the marginal
areas such as the Malabar coast or Sind, and that was mostly undertaken by the
Map 11.2 Turco-Afghan intrusion into India.
Kabul
Kanauj
Varanasi
Ghaznavid
attack on
Somnatha
A R A B I A
IRAN GHAZNAVID
EMPIRE
Ghaznavid forays
into the Ganga plain
Ghazni
Black Sea
Caspian
Sea
Aral Sea
ABBASID
CALIPHATE
GHURID EMPIRE
1000 km
600 miles
Key
Ghaznavid Empire
Ghurid conquests
Chola influence
around area of
south India
Key
238 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
Arabs. The Turco-Afghans did, however, indulge in a great deal of Islamic
iconoclasm. The example was set by Mahmud of Ghazni, whose greatest act of
destruction was the breaking of the sacred idols of the Brahamanic/Hindu
faith at the Somanatha Temple on the Gujarat coast. Where Mahmud had led,
his successors followed; and, during the two centuries, the great temples of
Mathura, Kanauj and Benares were destroyed. It is interesting to note that
after the consolidation of Turco-Afghan rule in 1206 there were hardly any
great Hindu temples built in north India; most of the temple building was
carried on in the south.38 The irreligious behaviour of Mahmud and other
Turco-Afghan rulers might have been due in part to their own misplaced
understanding of the Islamic faith, in the manner of zealots in all religions, but
also in part from their desire to please the fanatics within the Islamic clerical
establishment. Their actions were neither harshly criticised nor critically
scrutinised in any of the Indian writings in the centuries that followed;39 but
they must have been remembered sufficiently well, with the memories of their
misdeeds passed on among the succeeding generations of brahmans and
kshatriyas, for a deep well of resentment to arise in their hearts. The British
imperialists of the nineteenth century, ever searching for reasons to justify
their own rule over India, were not above instigating anti-Muslim sentiment
whenever it suited them,40 and this has had its perverse effects within modern
India. With the growth of a strong Hindu identity since the mid-nineteenth
century, one of the negative effects has been the nurturing of a historical myth
that all India’s misfortunes began with Mahmud of Ghazni and his successors.
It needs pointing out that Indian kings themselves drained away much of their
wealth and resources in many a pointless struggle against one another; that
they too destroyed temples and monasteries during their own bouts of sectarian
hatreds; and that, while he might have been an anti-Indian iconoclast, Mahmud
was certainly not an ethnic cleanser of Indians. His raids had hardly any effect,
one way or the other, on Indian demography.41 And he also pursued his Muslim
enemies in the same vengeful manner, either because he considered them to be
too powerful or because they were Shiite, the sect that he, as a Sunni, opposed.
It is also worth pointing out that, despite a very long period of Muslim
authority in India, Islam had managed to convert only a third of the subcontinent’s population by the twentieth century; furthermore, vast numbers of
Muslim converts were actually drawn from the marginalised and disenfranchised
groups, such as forest tribes, pastoral groups and the untouchables, who had
remained outside the Hindu religious and social system.
Fortunes of three Indic religions
India had, by now, become a multi-faith country. Seven of today’s world
religions – Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Christianity, Islam, Judaism and
Zoroastrianism – had generally secure footholds in the land. By far the largest
number of people would have been the adherents of Hinduism, although it is
most unlikely that they would have described themselves by the term Hindu.42
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 239
This was a term that came into popular usage from about the thirteenth or
fourteenth century onwards, and, although its origins are to be found in the
ancient Persian geographical references to the land that lay east of the River
Indus, it was the Muslims who gave it wide circulation when they used it as a
blanket term to describe those whom they considered to be idol worshippers.43
These so-called idol worshippers would, most probably, have described themselves by either their own caste and jati term or a faith term such as Vaishnava
or Shaivite. Buddhists, Jains and various groups of heretics from the Brahmanic
fold were generally called the Shramanas.
Diversity within Hinduism
Three broad strands had shaped Hinduism before it encountered Islam and
post-Enlightenment Europe. The oldest, Vedic Brahmanism, almost 3,000
years old by this period, had developed a most amazing framework of beliefs
and practices, and it commanded at best the nominal loyalty of the vast
majority of the people for many centuries. They were guided by the brahman
priests, who inculcated into them such ideas as the supremacy of the Vedas,
sacrifices to the Vedic gods, the caste system, the rituals of the ‘rites of passage’,
and the divine right of the monarchy to rule benevolently. In addition to the
Vedas, commentaries such as the Brahmanas and the Upanishads, the epics of
Ramayana and Mahabharata, the Dharma Shastras and the Dharma Sutras, and
the six schools of philosophy which taught such subjects as logic, cosmology,
causation, atheism and the idea of the self – all these were contained within the
philosophical, intellectual and theological framework of Vedic Brahmanism.
The second strand developed from the fifth century ad onwards, when a new
fervour came to permeate the spiritual aspirations of the people. This was the
bhakti movement, springing from the Puranic religion formed around the
Vaishnava and Shaivite traditions, which demanded from their followers intense
devotion to personal gods such as Vishnu or Shiva. Led by the Alvar and
Nayanar saints and poets, the bhakti movement swept through India like a
whirlwind in the later centuries of the first millennium ad and was to remain a
potent force for centuries into the next millennium. Vedic Brahmanism was
not displaced, but it was heavily challenged by the Puranic religion; and it was
the genius of such philosophers as Shankaracharya (788–822), Ramanuja
(1017–1137) and, a little later, Madhava (1197–1276), that they attempted to
bridge the differences between the two strands and not precipitate a destructive
separation between them. Royal power in the regional kingdoms navigated
skilfully between upholding the core values of the older strand while supporting
the devotionalists, who represented the growing popular forces of the time.
The role of the temples, which were the symbols of royal patronage, was
particularly critical in accommodating the two strands.44 It was in this same
spirit of understanding and reconciliation that the third strand, that of the
local cults, also became part of the developmental process of Hinduism. With
the formation of new regional kingdoms and the opening up of hitherto
240 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
inaccessible territories, remote groups of people were newly being brought
into the Brahmanic fold. Many of these people followed inchoate beliefs and
practices that existed at the village level, often involving goddess worship,
animal sacrifice and animism. Vedic Brahmanism, being the repository of the
conservative tradition, naturally remained cautious in its approach to cults;
but the Puranic religion learnt to embrace them and assimilate their deities
into the Hindu fold.45 The most powerful cults, known as Devi or Shakti, were
those that worshipped the Mother Goddess and her super-power for doing
good or evil to the world.46 In the Hindu pantheon the goddess Uma, or
Parvati, was the Mother Goddess showing her beneficent nature, while as
Durga, Kali or Shitala she assumed her demonic form.47 The female gender is
also accorded much strength and respect in the various Tantric cults, based on
magic and mystical formulas, although some of their practices include
‘elements of sexual perversion’.48 As many non-caste and lower caste people
followed the cults, it was vital to incorporate at least some of their beliefs into
the Hindu practice. Hence we see, during the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a
great increase in image worship and the individual worship of a deity in their
human aspect. The mythologies of deities also came to be popularised through
the regional languages and oral recitations.49
The caste system
The caste system became entrenched during this period, both among the
Rajput kingdoms of the north and in the Chola kingdom. There were, however,
some essential differences. In the north the idea of ritual ranking, with its neat
categorisation of society into four varnas, of the brahmans, kshatriyas, vaishyas
and shudras, was generally accepted, although there was a great degree of
manoeuvring by certain groups wanting a higher status for themselves. Just as
the Gurjara–Pratihara had been interested in status-seeking (Chapter 10),
many intermediate groups desired a kshatriya status; and the presence of terms
denoting various titles in the inscriptions of kingdoms, such as ranaka and
thakkura, illustrates the nature of caste hierarchy.50 Even among the brahmans
there were demarcations. Thus, the Kanyakubja (Kanauj) brahmans were
considered the most learned and most devout of their caste, while the untutored
brahmans elsewhere, performing lower grade rituals in temples, were granted
little esteem. Among the intermediate groups were various categories of merchants, artisans or even semi-professional people such as scribes. The various
grades of scribes, for example, came to be collectively known as the kayastha
caste.51 All sought higher ritual status. With the increasing complexity of
society and the growth of multifarious occupations, each varna contained many
people who were involved in tasks that were far removed from the prescribed
function of a varna member. The occupational groups, the jatis, nevertheless
strove to ensure for themselves as high a place as they could secure within the
varna framework. The jati formation was a tolerable process while the general
Brahmanic society remained manageably small in terms of aggregate numbers;
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 241
but it became far more complicated when, with the opening up of new lands
for the expansion of agriculture, large groups of non-caste people were being
exposed to Brahmanisation and Aryanisation. The result was that more and
more such people, consigned to the lowest occupations, swelled the ranks of
the shudra caste. Thereupon began a major shuffle within the shudra ranks; the
more dynamic of them came to be known as sat-shudras or pure shudras, whose
members were quite often upper level merchants and peasant landowners,
while those who performed the most menial and servile jobs, such as scavenging,
or who were employed as bonded labour, were beyond the pale and became
part of the untouchable groups. Their large numbers ensured the relative
comfort of all those above them, and this helped to give feudalism a strong
lease of life.52 In the final analysis, feudalism was, and remains, an oppressive
system of exploitation.
It is inadvisable to apprehend the caste system in the Tamil kingdoms of the
south through the prism of the northern model. Although the historic roots of
the caste system were perhaps in the north, some of the earliest Sangam
literature of the south also mentions features of the caste system. Originally, in
the south, there were agriculturists, pastoralists and hunters, but they did not
see themselves partitioned into varnas.
53 From about the later centuries of the
first millennium bc, when the northern brahmans began to settle in the south
and disseminate the Aryan and Sanskritic culture, with the idea of caste
implicit therein, we can see the faint beginnings of an incipient caste system
taking shape. All through the first millennium ad the kings of south India,
whether Pallavas, Pandyas, Cheras or Cholas, encouraged and supported the
brahmans in order to gain enduring legitimacy for themselves. They conferred
increasingly large land grants to the brahmadeyas, or to the temples, which
were the devadanas. The brahmadeyas and the temples perforce became the main
centres around which the southern model of the caste system would evolve and
be established.54 This model possessed its own distinctive characteristics. It
conceived of society as being made up of two segments: the brahmans and the
rest, collectively called shudras. Being far more numerous than the brahmans,
the shudras contained diverse groups of non-brahman people. The most dominant and the wealthiest of these groups, known as the vellalars, was made up of
prosperous landowners and rich farmers. Having no choice, the brahmans
accepted the vellalars almost as equals. The members of both groups shared
their responsibilities as managers and functionaries of the temples whose
substantial resources and assets they oversaw. The non-vellalarshudras followed
a host of occupations, ranging from various trades and crafts to the most menial
tasks. With the increasing complexity and mobility of the southern society in
general and the emergence of new trades, the non-vellalar shudras could no
longer be treated as a homogeneous group. Instead of being given a traditional
varna ranking after the northern model, the south Indians newly devised a
twofold division called the Right Hand and the Left Hand, known as valangai
and idangai.
55 The idea of the left/right caste divisions originally began with
the description of units in the Chola armies, but later on became marked by
242 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
occupational status. The Right Hand came to contain relatively more superior
occupational groups than the Left Hand. It used to be believed that the Right
Hand groups were those who were involved in stable agricultural occupations
and the Left Hand groups were mostly different types of artisans, but this
would be to oversimplify the purpose of the division. This division should be
seen as a particular form of cultural tool to resolve the problem of status or
ranking in a complex situation where different groups of people – newly
emergent Sanskritised hill people, forest people and tribals, craftsmen and
merchants, traders and pedlars – competed for space and position within the
social system. In the south Indian model of the Cholas, therefore, we had the
brahmans, the vellalars, and the Right Hand and the Left Hand groups. It
might be thought that this was a more rational and less oppressive system, but,
alas, it was not to be. There were always to be some groups of people whose
status could not be assigned even to the extreme left of the Left Hand, because
these were the people whose oppression was a sine qua non for the comfort and
prosperity of the society above them;56 and these people, in the south Indian
context, were the paraiya, the lowliest of the low – truly pariahs – those who
were not only untouchable but unworthy of approach. As far as oppression was
concerned, the south Indian model was no different from the northern one. It
was only in 1924 that the issues raised by the famous Vaikkom Satyagraha,
over the question of temple entry for the untouchables of the south, gave
impetus to initiate serious discourse on this subject among the thinking people
of both north and south India.57
Decline of Buddhism: some explanations
In the centuries under review here there were still a substantial number of
Buddhists in the northeast and northwest, along with some of their large
monasteries and monastic sites. The close of this period signalled the swift
demise of Buddhism. Among a number of lines of argument advanced by
historians for this sudden decline, four need to be looked at more closely.
Firstly, it has been argued that the Buddhist laity had lost its passion and
lacked any sense of organisation. Each person, according to the Buddha, had to
undertake his or her own journey towards salvation, and no amount of sacrifices
or rituals could help towards reaching that final goal. As it was, this was not
easy advice to follow; but its simplicity had made Buddhism popular both
among the poor and the socially and commercially mobile people during the
earlier centuries. The laity, however, could hardly be expected to retain that
sense of loyalty to the Buddha’s pristine message in an age when the ideologically revived Brahmanism, with its myriad rituals and caste etiquettes,
could more easily draw the Indian masses into its embrace. Besides, the
Buddhists themselves had increasingly become highly attracted towards the
Tantric practices that were being incorporated particularly into the Mahayana
form. Fewer and fewer Indians were being convinced of the distinctness of
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 243
Buddhism. A church without laity is like a university without a student body;
and with the rapid dissolution of its laity the Buddhist church in India soon
became an empty shell.58 Secondly, it has been argued that Indian Buddhism
lacked the political skills of survival in a changing environment. The sanghas,
the communities of monks, had been obliged to maintain a puritanical lifestyle,
although dependent for sustenance on the laity. In the age of benevolence of
rulers such as Ashoka and Kanishka the sanghas could continue with their
traditional calling. However, all institutions need sound political ‘antennae’ if
they wish to maintain their position. Unfortunately, the Buddhist sanghas
lacked any sense of the shifting winds of politics. Many of their monasteries
were situated along the trade routes rather than close to the cities, where political news travels faster.59 All this mattered little wherever the local ruler was
sympathetic to the Buddhists. After the fifth century ad, more often than not,
the rulers favoured Brahmanism or its offspring, Shaivism or Vaishnavism.
60
Thirdly, it has been argued that, in an age of Buddhist decadence, the flexible
and tolerant broad church that was Hinduism offered a real home for the
assimilation of Buddhists. There was supposed to be no harassment or persecution of the Buddhists. After all, the Buddha himself was incorporated into
the Hindu pantheon of gods.61 This is a somewhat questionable proposition,
because it was not unknown for Buddhists to be persecuted by kings inclining
towards Shaivism and Vaishnavism.
62 In a number of Puranas too the persecution
of many non-Brahmanic groups, including Buddhists, is considered as praiseworthy.63 We can only guess why it should be that the history of Buddhism in
India can be studied solely with the help of Brahmanic or foreign sources, such
as Tibetan, Sri Lankan or Nepali; it must be because there are hardly any
original surviving Buddhist documents from the Indian mainland.64 Of course,
many valuable manuscripts would have been taken away by the fervent and
devoted Chinese and Tibetan travellers, but a good number must have been
destroyed in the Brahmanic persecutions or the Turkish attacks on the
monasteries. From the ninth century onwards the Buddhists themselves began
to rationalise their assets, and they transferred their most important manuscripts and treasures to larger monasteries.65 One particular dynasty, the Palas
of Bengal, showed exceptional favours to the Buddhists, and with their help
great monastic institutions such as Nalanda and Vikramashila were enabled to
continue. Finally, there is an argument that the Buddhist demise was the result
of the cruelty and rapacity of the Turks who raided India in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries and started ruling north India from the thirteenth century
onwards. This is true as far as the wealthy monasteries such as Nalanda were
concerned, because all aggressors, past and present, have the pillaging instinct
in them; but it is far from the truth if it is implied that the Turks carried out
genocidal massacres of the Buddhist populace at large. They did not, and did
not need to, because the relatively few Buddhists who were left in India at the
end of our period posed no particular threat to them.66 Buddhism had been
dying in India long before the advent of the Turks.
244 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
The resilience of the Jains
The Jains did not suffer the same fate as the Buddhists. Their numbers might
not have been large, but they were able to preserve and maintain their religious
identity. A number of reasons might explain their survival instinct. They were
a highly literate trading community, with a finely developed sense of business
enterprise, which was valued by monarchs who appreciated the commercial
gains.67 They maintained a strong theological discipline among themselves;
and much of their asceticism and orthodoxy came to be admired by the Hindus.
While keeping close to the Hindu doctrine of salvation, they rejected any
notion of adopting theistic ideas of Shaivism and Vaishnavism, which helped
them to preserve their distinctness. Laity and monks monitored each other
closely.68 While the Buddhist laity was losing its fervour, the Jain fold took
upon itself the task of upholding the values and rituals of their religion. Unlike
the Buddhist monk, the Jain did not spend most of his time in monastic
establishments. The Jain monks were expected to mix with the general public
and be truly wandering mendicants. By the eleventh and twelfth centuries the
Jains had only a limited foothold in the Gangetic basin, but they were reasonably secure in Rajasthan, Gujarat and Karnataka. In Rajasthan and Gujarat
they suffered persecution at the hands of the Turks, but nevertheless survived
and continued to flourish in business and banking. In Gujarat particularly the
twelfth century was a golden age for the community. A great Jain intellectual,
Hemchandra, provided a powerful impetus to the growth and development of
the Gujarati language through his numerous writings.69 In Karnataka it was
their involvement with the Arab mercantile trade that won the Jains favourable
royal patronage. In the long run, however, their influence in Karnataka waned
during our period owing to the rise of the Lingayat sect of the Virashaivas, led
by a saint known as Basav. The Lingayats were extremely anti-Jain.70 Occasionally, the Jains also came under severe persecution at the hands of the
Shaivites. The Chola rulers in the deep south were Shaivites, but supported the
Jains, probably because the latter were important benefactors of the merchant
guilds, such as the Ayyavole 500, that were based in the nagarams.
71
Literature and great temples
Three literary masterpieces
The evolution of Indian languages and literatures in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries continued along the same routes marked out in the previous two or
three centuries. Sanskrit was cherished as a language of perfection and purity
by those with facility in it. For the masses, however, it remained a highly elitist
language. Good literature could also be written in Prakrit and Apabrahamasha,
according to the Jain polymath Hemchandra.72 Regional languages such as
Tamil and Kannada flourished, and Telugu and Gujarati evolved in this period.
The great writers commanded royal patronage and found favour at various
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 245
courts. They wrote poems, histories, dictionaries, grammars, plays and manuals
of science and medicine. It is difficult to be excited by the intellectual rigour or
the originality of these numerous and voluminous works; but there are three
particular gems that stand head and shoulders above these works and have
been esteemed by posterity. The first is the great Sanskrit lyrical poem Gita
Govinda, written by Jayadeva, the court poet at the court of Lakshmansena, the
Sena king of Bengal (1178–1205). This poem, combining words and music,
has become one of the great sources of religious inspiration in both medieval
and contemporary Vaishnavism, and millions of people in Bengal and Orissa
have, over the last 800 years, sung the songs embedded in the poem in their
homes and at the great Vashnavite fairs and festivals. Described as ‘a dramatic,
lyrical poem’,73 the Gita Govinda celebrates the passion of Krishna, the ‘cosmic
cowherd lover’,74 for Radha, the gopi, and it deals with the concept of love by
exploring what might be called ‘sacred profanities’,75 in the same way as the
artwork of the temples of Khajurao may be said to fuse eroticism with religious
experience.76 It uses all the techniques of good poetry that were known in
India: alliteration, lyricism, and grace of image for effect. In later centuries it
inspired the Bengali saint Chaitanya and the artists of the Kangra and Pahari
schools of painting.
The second great work of our period was the Rajatarangini, ‘River of Kings’,
a historical account of Kashmir written, in Sanskrit, by Kalhana, a Kashmiri
poet-courtier of the twelfth century (see Extract 11.2). Using diverse sources of
evidence, such as royal eulogies, coins, land grant records and temple inscriptions, Kalhana wrote 7,826 verses in eight books. While the author does not
strictly follow the modern historical method and quite often beautifies or
idealises the past, the Rajatarangini does provide us with a credible history of
Kashmir, particularly in its last five books.77 The general depiction through
the narrative is one of gradual decline, as the virtuous kings of the beginning
give way to wicked kings whose courts are filled with corruption as part of the
decline of the Kali Yuga. As a backcloth to its history, however, Kalhana does
provide a sound ecological and environmental perspective of the Kashmir of
his day.78
The third great and immortal work of this period is the famous account of
India, Kitab fi Tahqiqi ma li-l Hind, written in Arabic by an Iranian scholar,
scientist and traveller, Al-Biruni, who came to India with Mahmud of Ghazni
in 1017 and who stayed on until 1030. Mahmud of Ghazni may have a bad
reputation, but the Ghaznavids were not uncultured. Great poets and writers
such as Masud Razi, Masud Sa’ad Salman and Data Ganj Baksh flourished
under them, and Lahore was the centre of many cultural activities.79 Al-Biruni
was a true intellectual. During his thirteen years in India he mastered Sanskrit
and went on to study all the religious, philosophical, scientific and mathematical literatures of India. He had a great respect for much of the Indian
knowledge, particularly the mathematical and astronomical knowledge,
although he had harsh words to say about some of the Indian intellectuals’ lack
of critical scrutiny (see Extract 11.3). He was also a keen observer of the Indian
246 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
social scene, and wrote about the innumerable customs and traditions of the
Hindus. Although he was a devout Muslim he did not disparage the Hindus;
but he did point out some of their traits that he, arguably, considered to be
inferior. He thought them arrogant and intellectually lazy.80 He blamed both
Hindus and Muslims for their inability to empathise with each other;81 and,
although he had been favoured by Mahmud of Ghazni to accompany him, he
was bold enough to write that Mahmud’s raids were nothing short of barbaric.82
When one compares Al-Biruni’s work with that of some nineteenth-century
British commentators of India, such as James Mill, for example, one is struck
by the detached and independent outlook of the Iranian scholar in contrast to
the blatant racism that perverted the minds of so many nineteenth-century
British and European historians and intellectuals.83
The glory of Indian temples
Notwithstanding the iconoclasm of Mahmud of Ghazni and other TurcoAfghans, the eleventh and twelfth centuries were a period of remarkable
progress in temple building in different parts of India. We have already referred
to the three Indian temple styles – northern, southern and Deccani – in Chapter
9. The temples were constructed under the supervision of the sutradharas, the
architects, who designed religious precincts in strict accordance with the
geometrical rules laid down in the ancient Shilpashastras.
84 The architecture of
the northern-style temples reached its culmination and maturity at this time,
and the finest examples from the eleventh and twelfth centuries can be seen at
four site complexes. The largest concentration of such temples is to be found at
Bhubhaneshwar, in Orissa, dating from the seventh to the thirteenth centuries.
The most famous of these temples, from the eleventh century, is the Lingaraja,
whose architecture is characterised by motifs of human, animal and vegetable
life-forms and by lofty spires85 (see Figure 11.1). Another great complex of
northern temples has been left to posterity by the Chandella rulers of Bundelkhand at Khajuraho in Madhya Pradesh (see Figure 11.2). The largest, and
sculpturally the most notable, of the nearly twenty temples in the area is the
Khandariya Mahadeva, which enthrals the eye with its fine statuary and
decoration.86 Owing to their distance and remoteness, the Orissa and Khajuraho
temples might have escaped despoliation by the Turks. This was not the case
of the Rajasthan and Gujarat sites, where the Turks did cause much damage.87
Nevertheless we still have some fine examples from both areas to enrich our
senses. The most exquisite Rajasthani examples are the Dilwara Jain temples
on Mount Abu, especially the Vimala Vasahi, which was built in the eleventh
century by Vimala Shah, a wealthy Jain merchant, and dedicated to the first
Tirthankara. With its forty-eight pillars in the main hall and a richly carved
dome of eleven rings, the Vimala Vasahi is a remarkable showpiece of Jain
religious philanthropy.88 The carving in this temple is that of the Solanki style,
named after the dynasty that ruled both Gujarat and Rajasthan in the eleventh
and twelfth centuries. The best surviving example of the Solanki temples on
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 247
the Gujarat site is the Surya temple at Modhera, the beauty of which so moved
an art historian that he called its creator ‘a weaver of dreams’.89 Rich and refined
Solanki carving is one of the key features of this beautiful sandstone temple
sited beside a stepped tank.
It was mentioned in Chapter 9 that the southern-style temples began with
the Pallavas in the seventh and eighth centuries; however, they reached their
apogee under the Cholas in the eleventh century and under the Pandyas in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The two most iconic temples, within the
period under review, are those at Thanjavur and Gangaikondacholapuram.
The first, the Brihadiswara Temple, built by Rajaraja I, in the Chola capital of
Thanjavur (Tanjore), is one of the grandest Hindu temples of India (see Figure
11.3). With its 62 metre high vimana, a dome carved from an 80 ton block of
granite and, mounted on the tower, the innumerable carvings of dancers along
with the sculptures of Shiva, Vishnu and Durga, and a gigantic Nandi bull
guarding the entrance, this World Heritage Site temple is expressive of Chola
religious piety at its best. Among the many buildings within the temple
complex were housing blocks for nearly 400 devadasis, or temple dancers, who,
Figure 11.1 Temple styles of Bhubhaneshwar (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted from a
 photo in Rawson, op. cit., p. 112).
248 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
along with the priests and the musicians, were an integral part of the Chola
temple community.90 Modelled on this temple was the second temple, built by
Rajaraja’s son, Rajendra I, to commemorate his expedition to the sacred River
Ganga and its water that was brought all the way from Bengal. This too is an
extremely large site, 100 metres long and 40 metres wide. Its mandapa
(assembly hall) and the sanctuary inside the compound were raised on a high
platform, while its vimana soars 55 metres into the sky. It too contains a
fabulous array of sculptures.91 The Chola artists specialised in both stone and
metallic sculptures, and the most prominent figure portrayed was the god
Shiva. The world-famous graceful bronze sculpture of Shiva Nataraja, from
Tiruvalangadu, has been described by the French sculptor Rodin as ‘the most
perfect representation of rhythmic movement in art’.92
The chief feature of the Deccani-style temples, found mostly in Karnataka
from the time of the early Chalukyas of Badami in the seventh and eighth
centuries, was the enormous polygonal, star-shaped base on which the temple
structure stood. This style continued to evolve under the later Chalukyas of
Kalyani and the Hoysalas. The best examples of the Deccani style during the
Figure 11.2 Temple scene from Khajuraho (by permission of RHPL).
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 249
eleventh and twelfth centuries are to be found at Belur and Halebid. The
temples, small but ‘superbly conceived’,93 were built to supplicate the gods for
victory in battles. The Hoysaleswara Temple in Halebid, begun in the twelfth
century, took more than a hundred years to complete; but the richness of its
frieze carvings, and particularly that of a line of 650 elephants, and of the
various jewels and ornaments worn by gods and goddesses provide ample
evidence of the skills of the builders and sculptors of the Deccan.94
SELECT EXTRACTS FOR REVIEW AND REFLECTION
Extract 11.1 The guild of Ayyavole 500
The Ayyavole 500 was one of the main south Indian guilds of merchants
who were the controllers of the Chola overseas trade. They dealt in a
variety of commodities sought by foreign merchants; and their influence
Figure 11.3 Brihadisawara Temple at Thanjavur (Pat Baker: line drawing adapted
 from a photo in Rawson, op. cit., p. 110).
250 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
throughout south India was wide ranging. Some of the guild’s activities
are described in the following passage:
The chief source of information on Ayyavole . . . is the corpus of
inscriptions [which] are generally recorded on stone and also occasionally on copper plates . . . and often located in or near temples and
are intended as records of the taxes in cash and in kind levied for the
benefit of the temple, from merchant groups and from townspeople,
on commodities produced in the area, or on goods in transit. Occasionally they recorded public services in villages or urban areas which
are initiated or maintained by merchants. And on a few occasions they
record details of what appears to be an agreement between ruler and
merchant, demarcating merchant townships, or in one case, a
contractual agreement recording trading rights granted to a group of
foreign traders, as well as to local trade groups.
As with most Indian inscriptions, the charter generally began with a
eulogy to the ruler, known as the parasasti; its usefulness is explained
thus:
Both from the standardised phrases and from the newer interpretations
one obtains indications of intricate factors such as the relationship of
merchants with the state or ruler, or the position of the guild to other
corporate bodies, or the religious affiliation of its members at a
particular time and place.
Source: Meera Abraham, Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India,
New Delhi: Manohar, 1988, pp. 3–4; also check pp. 156–81.
Extract 11.2 Kalhana as a historian
Although Kalhana cannot be considered as a historian in the modern
sense, his Rajatarangini does provide evidence that he had a certain
definite sense of what a good historian should or should not be. In his
opinion, as the following passages show, a historian must have a vision;
he must be impartial; he should present his version of the story from his
own perspective; and he must be able to synthesise a number of previous
accounts into a coherent whole.
If the poet did not see in his mind’s eye the existences which he is to
reveal to all men, what other indication would there be of his
possessing divine intuition?
That noble-minded poet is alone worthy of praise whose word, like
that of a judge, keeps free from love or hatred in relating the facts of
the past.
Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder 251
If I narrate again the subject matter of tales which others have treated,
still the virtuous ought not to turn their faces from me without
hearing my reasons.
What is the skill required in order that men of a later time should
supplement the narrative of events in the works of those who died
after composing each the history of those kings whose contemporaries
they were? Hence my endeavour is to give a connected account where
the narrative of past events has become fragmentary in many respects.
Source: M.A. Stein, Kalhana’s Rajatarangini, New Delhi: Motilal Banasidass, [1900] 1961, Book 1: 5, 7, 8, 10. Read also A.L. Basham, Studies in
Indian History and Culture, Calcutta: Sambodhi, 1964, pp. 45–56.
Extract 11.3 Al-Biruni’s assessment of the Indian
 intellectual scene
Among the many subjects pertaining to India that Al-Biruni writes
about, his views on Indian mathematics and astronomy are quite critical.
Although the Arabs had received many useful mathematical concepts
from the Indians, Al-Biruni is not too impressed, but he also suggests
some reasons for this state of affairs:
I can only compare their mathematical and astronomical literature . . .
to a mixture of pearl shells and sour dates, or of pearls and dung, or of
costly crystals and common pebbles. Both kinds of things are equal in
the eyes (of the Hindus), since they cannot raise themselves to the
methods of a strictly scientific deduction.
He provides three interesting reasons for this dismal state of affairs.
Firstly:
The Indian scribes are careless, and do not take pains to produce
correct and well-collated copies. In consequence, the highest results
of the author’s mental development are lost by their negligence, and
his book becomes already in the first or second copy so full of faults,
that the text appears something entirely new, which neither a scholar
nor one familiar with the subject, whether Hindu or Muslim, could
any longer understand.
Secondly:
Mahmud [of Ghazni] utterly ruined the prosperity of the country . . .
the Hindus became like the atoms of dust scattered in all directions
. . . This is the reason, too, why Hindu sciences have retired far away
252 Chola domination and Turco-Afghan plunder
from those parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to
places which our hand cannot yet reach, to Kashmir, Benares, and
other places. And there the antagonism between them and all
foreigners receives more and more nourishment both from political
and religious sources.
Thirdly:
Folly is an illness for which there is no medicine, and the Hindus
believe that there is no country but theirs, no nation like theirs, no
king like theirs, no religion like theirs, no science like theirs.

•	The Great Mughal Empire declined and disintegrated during the first half of the 18th century.

•	The Mughal Emperors lost their power and glory and their empire shrank to a few square miles around Delhi.

•	In the end, in 1803, Delhi itself was occupied by the British army and the proud of Mughal Emperor was reduced to the status of a mere pensioner of a foreign power.

•	The decline of Mughal Empire reveals some of the defects and weaknesses of India's medieval social, economic, and political structure which were responsible for the eventual subjugation of the country by the English East India Company.

•	The unity and stability of the Empire had been shaken up during the long and strong reign of Aurangzeb; yet in spite of his many harmful policies, the Mughal administration was still quite efficient and the Mughal army quite strong at the time of his death in 1707.
 
Indian History

•	For better understanding (of the decline of Mughal Empire), the subsequent chapters (kept under the following headings) describe feeble Mughal Emperors, their weaknesses, and faulty activities:

o	Bahadur Shah I

o	Jahandar Shah

o	Farrukh Siyar

o	Muhammad Shah

o	Nadir Shah’s Outbreak

o	Ahmad Shah Abdali
 











•	On Aurangzeb's death, his three sons fought among themselves for the throne. The 65-year old Bahadur Shah emerged victorious. He was learned, dignified, and deserving.

•	Bahadur Shah followed a policy of compromise and conciliation, and there was evidence of the reversal of some of the narrow-minded policies and measures adopted by Aurangzeb. He adopted a more tolerant attitude towards the Hindu chiefs and rajas.


•	There was no destruction of temples in Bahadur Shah’s reign. In the beginning, he made an attempt to gain greater control over the regional states through the conciliation; however, dissensions developed among the regional kingdoms (including Rajput, Marathas, etc.); resultantly, they fought among themselves as well as against Mughal Emperor.
 
Indian History

•	Bahadur Shah had tried to conciliate the rebellious Sikhs by making peace with Guru Gobind Singh and giving him a high mansab (rank). But after the death of the Guru, the Sikhs once again raised the banner of revolt in Punjab under the leadership of Banda Bahadur. The Emperor decided to take strong measures and himself led a campaign against the rebels, soon controlled practically the entire territory between the Sutlej and the Yamuna, and reached the close neighborhood of Delhi.

•	Bahadur Shah conciliated Chatarsal (the Bundela chief, who remained a loyal feudatory) and the Jat chief Churaman, who joined him in the campaign against Banda Bahadur.

•	In spite of hard efforts of Bahadur Shah, there was further deterioration in the field of administration in Bahadur Shah's reign. The position of state finances worsened as a result of his reckless grants and promotions.

•	During Bahadur Shah's reign, the remnants of the Royal treasure, amounting to some total 13 crores of rupees in 1707, were exhausted.

•	Bahadur Shah was examining towards a solution of the problems besetting the Empire. He might have revived the Imperial fortunes, but unfortunately, his death in 1712 plunged the Empire once again into civil war.
 











•	After Bahadur Shah’s death, a new element entered Mughal politics i.e. the succeeding wars of succession. While previously the contest for the power had been between royal princes only, and the nobles had hardly any interference to the throne; now ambitious nobles became direct contenders for the power and used princes as mere pawns to capture the seats of authority.

•	In the civil war, one of Bahadur Shah's weak sons, Jahandar Shah, won because he was supported by Zulfiqar Khan, the most powerful noble of the time.

•	Jahandar Shah was a weak and degenerate prince who was wholly devoted to pleasure. He lacked good manners, dignity, and decency.

•	During Jahandar Shah's reign, the administration was virtually in the hands of the extremely capable and energetic Zulfiqar Khan, who was his wazir.

•	Zulfiqar Khan believed that it was necessary to establish friendly relations with the Rajput rajas and the Maratha Sardars and to conciliate the Hindu chieftains necessary to strengthen his own position at the Court and to save the Empire.
 
Indian History

Therefore, he swiftly reversed the policies of Aurangzeb and abolished the hated jzyah (tax).

•	Jai Singh of Amber was given the title of Mira Raja Saint and appointed Governor of Malwa; Ajit Singh of Marwar was awarded the tide of Maharaja and appointed Governor of Gujarat.

•	Zulfiqar Khan made an attempt to secure the finances of the Empire by checking the reckless growth of jagirs and offices. He also tried to compel the (nobles) to maintain their official quota of troops.

•	An evil tendency encouraged by him was that of ‘ijara’ or revenue-farming. Instead of collecting land revenue at a fixed rate as under Todar Mal’s land revenue settlement, the Government began to contract with revenue farmers and middlemen to pay the Government a fixed amount of money while they were left free to collect whatever they could from the peasant. This encouraged the oppression of the peasant.

•	Many jealous nobles secretly worked against Zulfiqar Khan. Worse still, the Emperor did not give him his trust and cooperation in full measure. The Emperor's ears were poisoned against Zulfiqar Khan by unscrupulous favorites. He was told that his wazir was becoming too powerful and ambitious and might even overthrow the Emperor himself.

•	The cowardly Emperor could not dismiss the powerful wajir (Zulfiqar Khan), but he began to intrigue against him secretly.
 











•	Jahandar Shah's inglorious reign came to an early end in January 1713 when he was defeated at Agra by his nephew Farrukh Siyar.

•	Farrukh Siyar owed his victory to the Sayyid brothers, Abdullah Khan and Husain Ali Khan Baraha, who were therefore given the offices of wazir and nur bakshi respectively.


 

•	The Sayyid brothers soon acquired dominant control over the affairs of the state and Farrukh Siyar lacked the capacity to rule. He was coward, cruel, undependable, and faithless. Moreover, he allowed himself to be influenced by worthless favorites and flatterers.

•	In spite of his weaknesses, Farrukh Siyar was not willing to give the Sayyid brothers a free hand but wanted to exercise personal authority.

•	The Sayyid brothers were convinced that administration could be carried on properly, the decay of the Empire checked, and their own position safeguarded only if they wielded real authority and the Emperor merely reigned without ruling.

•	There was a prolonged struggle for power between the Emperor Farrukh Siyar and his wazir and mir bakshi.

•	Year after year the ungrateful Emperor intrigued to overthrow the two brothers, but he failed repeatedly. In the end of 1719, the Sayyid brothers deposed Farrukh Siyar and killed him.

•	In Farrukh Siyar place, they raised to the throne in quick succession two young princes' namely Rafi-ul Darjat and Rafi ud-Daulah (cousins of Farrukh Siyar), but they died soon. The Sayyid brothers now made Muhammad Shah the Emperor of India.

•	The three successors of Farrukh Siyar were mere puppets in the hands of the Saiyids Even their personal liberty to meet people and to move around was restricted. Thus, from 1713 until 1720, when they were overthrown, the Sayyid brothers wielded the administrative power of the state.

•	The Sayyid brothers made a rigorous effort to control rebellions and to save the Empire from administrative disintegration. They failed in these tasks mainly because they were faced with constant political rivalry, quarrels, and conspiracies at the court.

•	The everlasting friction in the ruling circles disorganized and even paralyzed administration at all levels and spread lawlessness and disorder everywhere.

•	The financial position of the state deteriorated rapidly as zamindars and rebellious elements refused to pay land revenue, officials misappropriated state revenues, and central income declined because of the spread of revenue farming.

•	The salaries of officials and soldiers could not be paid regularly and soldiers became undisciplined and even mutinous.
 

•	Many nobles were jealous of the 'growing power’ of the Sayyid brothers. The deposition and murder of Farrukh Siyar frightened many of them: if the Emperor could be killed, what safety was there for mere nobles?

•	Moreover, the murder of the Emperor created a wave of public revulsion against the two brothers. They were looked down upon as traitors.

•	Many of the nobles of Aurangzeb's reign also disliked the Sayyid alliance with the Rajput and the Maratha chiefs and their liberal policy towards the Hindus.

•	Many nobles declared that the Sayyids were following anti-Mughal and anti- Islamic policies. They thus tried to arouse the fanatical sections of the Muslim nobility against the Sayyid brothers.
•	The anti- Sayyid nobles were supported by Emperor Muhammad Shah who wanted to free himself from the control of the two brothers.

•	In 1720, Haider Khan killed Hussain Ali khan on 9 October 1720, the younger of the two brothers. Abdullah Khan tried to fight, back but was defeated near Agra. Thus ended the domination of the Mughal Empire by the Sayyid brothers (they were known in Indian history as 'king makers').
 











•	Muhammad Shah's long reign of nearly 30 years (1719-1748) was the last chance of saving the Empire. But Muhammad Shah was not the man of the moment. He was weak-minded and frivolous and over-fond of a life of ease and luxury.

•	Muhammad Shah neglected the affairs of state. Instead of giving full support to knowledgeable wazirs such as Nizam-ul-Mulk, he fell under the evil influence of corrupt and worthless flatterers and intrigued against his own ministers. Ho even shared in the bribes taken by his favorite courtiers.

•	Disgusted with the fickle-mindedness and suspicious nature of the Emperor and the constant quarrels at the court, Nizum-ul-Mulk, the most powerful noble
 
Indian History

of the time, decided to follow his own ambition. He had become the wazir in 1722 and had made a vigorous attempt to reform the administration.

•	Nizum-ul-Mulk decided to leave the Emperor and his Empire to their fate and to strike out on his own. He relinquished his office in October 1724 and marched south to find the state of Hyderabad in the Deccan. "His departure was symbolic of the flight of loyalty and virtue from the Empire.”

•	After the withdrawal of Nizum-ul-Mulk, many other zamindars, rajas, and nawabs of many states raised the banner of rebellion and independence. For example Bengal, Hyderabad, Avadh, Punjab, and Maratha.
 











•	In 1738-39, Nadir Shah descended upon the plains of northern India.

•	Nadir Shah was attracted to India by the fabulous wealth for which it was always famous. The visible weakness of the Mughal Empire made such spoliation possible.

•	Nadir Shah marched on to Delhi and the Emperor Muhammad Shah was taken as prisoner.

•	A terrible massacre of the citizens of the imperial capital was ordered by Nadir Shah as a reprisal against the killing of some of his soldiers.
 
Indian History


•	The greedy invader Nadir Shah took possession of the royal treasury and other royal property, levied tribute on the leading nobles, and plundered Delhi.

•	Nadir Shah’s total plunder has been estimated about 70 crores of rupees. This enabled him to exempt taxation of his own Kingdom for three years.

•	Nadir Shah also carried away the famous Koh-i-nur diamond and the Jewel- studded Peacock Throne of Shahjahan.

•	Nadir Shah compelled Muhammad Shah to cede to him all the provinces of the Empire falling west of the river Indus.

•	Nadir Shah's Invasion inflicted immense damage on the Mughal Empire. It caused an irreparable loss of prestige and exposed the hidden weaknesses of the Empire to the Maratha Sardars and the foreign trading companies.

•	The invasion ruined imperial finances and adversely affected the economic life of the country. The impoverished nobles began to rack-rent and oppress the peasantry even more in an effort to recover their lost fortunes.

•	The loss of Kabul and the areas to the west of the Indus once again opened the Empire to the threat of invasions from the North-West. A vital line of defense had disappeared.
 











•	After Muhammad Shah's death in 1748, bitter struggles, and even civil war broke out among unscrupulous and power hungry nobles. Furthermore, as a result of the weakening of the north-western defenses, the Empire was devastated by the repeated invasions of Ahmed Shah Abdali, one of Nadir Shah's ablest generals, who had succeeded in establishing his authority over Afghanistan after his master's death.

•	Abdali repeatedly invaded and plundered northern India right down to Delhi and Mathura between 1748 and 1767.

•	In 1761, Abdali defeated the Maratha in the Third Battle of Panipat and thus gave a big blow to their ambition of controlling the Mughal Emperor and thereby dominating the country.

•	After defeating Mughal and Maratha, Abdali did not, however, found a new Afghan kingdom in India. He and his successors could not even retain the Punjab which they soon lost to the Sikh chiefs.

•	As a result of the invasions of Nadir Shah Abdali and the suicidal internal feuds of the Mughal nobility, the Mughal Empire had (by 1761) ceased to exist in practice as an all-India Empire.
 
Indian History

•	Mughal Empire narrowed merely as the Kingdom of Delhi. Delhi itself was a scene of 'daily riot and tumult'.

•	Shah Alam II, who ascended the throne in 1759, spent the initial years as an Emperor wandering from place to place far away from his capital, for he lived in mortal fear of his own war.

•	Shah Alam II was a man of some ability and ample courage. But the Empire was by now beyond redemption.

•	In 1764, Shah Alam II joined Mir Qasim of Bengal and Shuja-ud-Daula of Avadh in declaring war upon the English East India Company.

•	Defeated by the British at the Battle of Buxar (October 1764), Shah Alam II lived for several years at Allahabad as a pensioner of the East India Company.

•	Shah Alam II left the British shelter in 1772 and returned to Delhi under the protective arm of the Marathas.

•	The British occupied Delhi in 1803 and since that time to till 1857, when the Mughal dynasty was finally extinguished, the Mughal Emperors merely served as a political front for the English.
 











•	Beginning of the decline of the Mughal Empire can be traced to the strong rule of Aurangzeb.

•	Aurangzeb inherited a large empire, yet he adopted a policy of extending it further to the farthest geographical limits in the south at the great expense of men and materials.


Political Cause
•	In reality, the existing means of communication and the economic and political structure of the country made it difficult to establish a stable centralized administration over all parts of the country.

•	Aurangzeb’s objective of unifying the entire country under one central political authority was, though justifiable in theory, not easy in practice.

•	Aurangzeb’s futile but arduous campaign against the Marathas extended over many years; it drained the resources of his Empire and ruined the trade and industry of the Deccan.

•	Aurangzeb’s absence from the north for over 25 years and his failure to subdue the Marathas led to deterioration in administration; this undermined the prestige of the Empire and its army.
 

•	In the 18th century, Maratha’s expansion in the north weakened central authority still further.

•	Alliance with the Rajput rajas with the consequent military support was one of the main pillars of Mughal strength in the past, but Aurangzeb's conflict with some of the Rajput states also had serious consequences.

•	Aurangzeb himself had in the beginning adhered to the Rajput alliance by raising Jaswant Singh of Kamer and Jai Singh of Amber to the highest of ranks. But his short-sighted attempt later to reduce the strength of the Rajput rajas and extend the imperial sway over their lands led to the withdrawal of their loyalty from the Mughal throne.

•	The strength of Aurangzeb’s administration was challenged at its very nerve center around Delhi by Satnam, the Jat, and the Sikh uprisings. All of them were to a considerable extent the result of the oppression of the Mughal revenue officials over the peasantry.

•	They showed that the peasantry was deeply dissatisfied with feudal oppression by Zamindars, nobles, and the state.

Religious Cause
•	Aurangzeb's religious orthodoxy and his policy towards the Hindu rulers seriously damaged the stability of the Mughal Empire.

•	The Mughal state in the days of Akbar, Jahangir, and Shahjahan was basically a secular state. Its stability was essentially founded on the policy of noninterference with the religious beliefs and customs of the people, fostering of friendly relations between Hindus and Muslims.

•	Aurangzeb made an attempt to reverse the secular policy by imposing the jizyah (tax imposed on non-Muslim people), destroying many of the Hindu temples in the north, and putting certain restrictions on the Hindus.

•	The jizyah was abolished within a few years of Aurangzeb’s death. Amicable relations with the Rajput and other Hindu nobles and chiefs were soon restored.

•	Both the Hindu and the Muslim nobles, zamindars, and chiefs ruthlessly oppressed and exploited the common people irrespective of their religion.

Wars of Succession & Civil Wars
•	Aurangzeb left the Empire with many problems unsolved, the situation was further worsened by the ruinous wars of succession, which followed his death.
 

•	In the absence of any fixed rule of succession, the Mughal dynasty was always plagued after the death of a king by a civil war between the princes.

•	The wars of succession became extremely fierce and destructive during the 18th century and resulted in great loss of life and property. Thousands of trained soldiers and hundreds of capable military commanders and efficient and tried officials were killed. Moreover, these civil wars loosened the administrative fabric of the Empire.

•	Aurangzeb was neither weak nor degenerate. He possessed great ability and capacity for work. He was free of vices common among kings and lived a simple and austere life.

•	Aurangzeb undermined the great empire of his forefathers not because he lacked character or ability but because he lacked political, social, and economic insight. It was not his personality, but his policies that were out of joint.

•	The weakness of the king could have been successfully overcome and covered up by an alert, efficient, and loyal nobility. But the character of the nobility had also deteriorated. Many nobles lived extravagantly and beyond their means. Many of them became ease-loving and fond of excessive luxury.

•	Many of the emperors neglected even the art of fighting.

•	Earlier, many able persons from the lower classes had been able to rise to the ranks of nobility, thus infusing fresh blood into it. Later, the existing families of nobles began to monopolies all offices, barring the way to fresh comers.

•	Not all the nobles, however, bad become weak and inefficient. A large number of energetic and able officials and brave and brilliant military commanders came into prominence during the 18th century, but most of them did not benefit the Empire because they used their talents to promote their own interests and to fight each other rather than to serve the state and society.

•	The major weakness of the Mughal nobility during the 18th century lay, not in the decline in the average ability of the nobles or their moral decay, but in their selfishness and lack of devotion to the state and this, in turn, gave birth to corruption in administration and mutual bickering.

•	In order to increase emperors’ power, prestige, and income, the nobles formed groups and factions against each other and even against the king. In their struggle for power, they took recourse to force, fraud, and treachery.

•	The mutual quarrels exhausted the Empire, affected its cohesion, led to its dismemberment, and, in the end, made it an easy prey to foreign conquerors.
 

•	A basic cause of the downfall of the Mughal Empire was that it could no longer satisfy the minimum needs of its population.

•	The condition of the Indian peasant gradually worsened during the 17th and 18th centuries. Nobles made heavy demands on the peasants and cruelly oppressed them, often in violation of official regulations.

•	Many ruined peasants formed roving bands of robbers and adventurers, often under the leadership of the zamindars, and thus undermined law and order and the efficiency of the Mughal administration.

•	During the 18th century, the Mughal army lacked discipline and fighting morale. Lack of finance made it difficult to maintain a large number of army. Its soldiers and officers were not paid for many months, and, since they were mere mercenaries, they were constantly disaffected and often verged on a mutiny.

•	The civil wars resulted in the death of many brilliant commanders and brave and experienced solders. Thus, the army, the ultimate sanction of an empire, and the pride of the Great Mughals, was so weakened that it could no longer curb the ambitious chiefs and nobles or defend the Empire from foreign aggression.

Foreign Invasion
•	A series of foreign invasions affected Mughal Empire very badly. Attacks by Nadir Shah and Ahmad Shah Abdali, which were themselves the consequences of the weakness of the Empire, drained the Empire of its wealth, ruined its trade and industry in the North, and almost destroyed its military power.

•	The emergence of the British challenge took away the last hope of the revival of the crisis-ridden Empire.
 











•	The rulers of the South Indian states established law and order and viable economic and administrative states. They curbed with varying degrees of success.

•	The politics of South Indian states were invariably non-communal or secular. The motivations of their rulers were being similar in economic and political terms.

•	The rulers of South Indian states did not discriminate on religious grounds in public appointment; civil or military; nor did the rebels against their authority pay much attention to the religion of the rulers.

•	None of the South Indian states, however, succeeded in arresting the economic crisis. The zamindars and jagirdars, whose had number constantly increased, continued to fight over a declining income from agriculture, while the condition of the peasantry continued to deteriorate.

•	While the South Indian states prevented any breakdown of internal trade and even tried to promote foreign trade, they did nothing to modernize the basic industrial and commercial structure of their states.

•	Following were the important states of South India in 18th century:
 

Hyderabad and the Carnatic
•	The state of Hyderabad was founded by Nizam-ul-Mulk Asaf Jah in 1724. He was one of the leading nobles of the post-Aurangzeb era.

•	Asaf Jah never openly declared his independence in front of the Central Government, but in practice, he acted like an independent ruler. He waged wars, concluded peace, conferred titles, and gave jaws and offices without reference to Delhi.

•	Asaf Jah followed a tolerant policy towards the Hindus. For example, a Hindu, Purim Chand, was his Dewan. He consolidated his power by establishing an orderly administration in Deccan.
 



•	After the death of Asaf Jah (in 1748), Hyderabad fell prey to the same disruptive forces as were operating at Delhi.

•	The Carnatic was one of the subahs of the Mughal Deccan and as such came under the Nizam of Hyderabad's authority. But just as in practice the Nizam had become independent of Delhi, so also the Deputy Governor of the Carnatic, known as the Nawab of Carnatic, had freed himself from the control of the Viceroy of Deccan and made his office hereditary.

Mysore
•	Next to Hyderabad, the most important power that emerged in South India was Mysore under Haidar Ali. The kingdom of Mysore had prescribed its precarious independence ever since the end of the Vijayanagar Empire.

•	Haider Ali born in 1721, in an obscure family, started his career as a petty officer in the Mysore army. Though uneducated, he possessed a keen intellect and was a man of great energy and daring and determination. He was also a brilliant commander and shrewd diplomat.

 

•	Cleverly using the opportunities that came his way, Haidar Ali gradually rose in the Mysore army. He soon recognized the advantages of western military training and applied it to the troops under his own command.

•	In 1761, Haidar Ali overthrew Nanjaraj and established his authority over the Mysore state. He took over Mysore when it was weak and divided state and soon made it one of the leading Indian powers.

•	Haidar Ali extended full control over the rebellious poligars (zamindars) and conquered the territories of Bidnur, Sunda, Sera, Canara, and Malabar.

•	Haidar Ali practiced religious toleration and his first Dewan and many other officials were Hindus.

•	Almost from the beginning of the establishment of his power, Haidar Ali was engaged in wars with the Maratha Sardars, the Nizam, and the British forces.

•	In 1769, Haidar Ali repeatedly defeated the British forces and reached the walls of Madras. He died in 1782 in the course of the second Anglo-Mysore War and was succeeded by his son Tipu.

•	Sultan Tipu, who ruled Mysore untill his death at the hands of the British in 1799, was a man of complex character. He was, for one an innovator.

 

•	Tipu Sultan’s desire to change with the times was symbolized in the Introduction of a new calendar, a new system of coinage, and new scales of weights and measures.

•	Tipu Sultan’s personal library contained books on such diverse subjects as religion, history, military science, medicine, and mathematics. He showed a keen interest in the French Revolution.

•	Tipu Sultan planted a 'Tree of Liberty' at Sringapatam and he became a member of a Jacobin club.

•	Tipu Sultan tried to do away with the custom of giving jagirs, and thus increased the state income. He also made an attempt to reduce the hereditary possessions of the poligars.

•	Tipu Sultan’s land revenue was as high as that of other contemporary rulers— it ranged up to 1/3rd of the gross produce. But he checked the collection of illegal ceases, and he was liberal in granting remissions.

•	Tipu Sultan’s infantry was armed with muskets and bayonets in fashion, which were, however, manufactured in Mysore.

•	Tipu Sultan made an effort to build a modern navy after 1796. For this purpose, two dockyards, the models of the ships being supplied.

•	Tipu Sultan was recklessly brave and, as a commander was, however, hasty in action and unstable in nature.

•	Tipu Sultan stood forth as a foe for the rising English power. The English, in turn, too as his most dangerous enemy in India.

•	Tipu Sultan gave money for the construction of goddess Sarda in the Shringeri
Temple in 1791. He regularly gave gifts to as well to several other temples.

•	In 1799, while fighting the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, Tipu Sultan died.
 


 

Kerala
•	At the beginning of the 18th century, Kerala was divided into a large number of feudal chiefs and rajas.

•	The kingdom of Travancore rose into prominence after 1729 under King
Martanda Varma, one of the leading statesmen of the 18th century.

 

•	Martanda Varma organized a strong army on the western model with the help of European officers and armed it with modern weapons. He also constructed a modern arsenal.

•	Martanda Varma used his new army to expand northwards and the boundaries of Travancore soon extended from Kanyakumari to Cochin.

•	Martanda Varma undertook many irrigation works, built roads and canals for communication, and gave active encouragement to foreign trade.

•	By 1763, all the petty principalities of Kerala had been absorbed or subordinated by the three big states of Cochin, Travancore, and Calicut.

•	Harder Ali began his invasion of Kerala in 1766 and in the end annexed northern Kerala up to Cochin, including the territories of the Zamorin of Calicut.

•	Trivandrum, the capital of Travancore, became a famous center of Sanskrit scholarship during the second half of the 18th century.

•	Rama Varma, the successor of Martanda Varma, was himself a poet, a scholar, a musician, a renowned actor, and a man of great culture. He conversed fluently in English, took a keen interest in European affairs. He regularly used to read newspapers and journals published in London, Calcutta, and Madras.
 











•	Following were the important North Indian States in 18th Century:

Avadh
•	The founder of the autonomous kingdom of Avadh was Saadat Khan Burhan- ul-Mulk who was appointed as Governor of Avadh in 1722. He was an extremely bold, energetic, iron-willed, and intelligent person.

•	At the time of Burhan-ul-Mulk’s appointment, rebellious zamindars had raised their heads everywhere in the province. They refused to pay the land tax, organized their own private armies, erected forts, and defied the Imperial Government.

•	For years, Burhan-ul-Mulk had to wage war upon them. He succeeded in suppressing lawlessness and disciplining the big zamindars and thus, increasing the financial resources of his government.
 

•	Burhan-ul-Mulk also carried out a fresh revenue settlement in 1723, as he was asked to improve the peasant condition by protecting them from oppression by the big zamindars.

•	Like the Bengal Nawabs, Burhan-ul-Mulk too did not discriminate between Hindus and 'Muslims. Many of his commanders and high officials were Hindus and he 'curbed refractory zamindars, chiefs, and nobles irrespective of their religion. His troops were well-paid, well-armed, and Well-trained.

•	Before his death in 1739, Burhan-ul-Mulk had become virtually independent and had made the province a hereditary possession.

•	Burhan-ul-Mulk was succeeded by his nephew Safdar Jang, who was simultaneously appointed the wazir of the Empire in 1748 and granted in addition the province of Allahabad.

•	Safdar Jang suppressed rebellious zamindars and made an alliance with the Maratha Sardars so that his dominion was saved from their incursions.

•	Safdar Jang gave a long period of peace to the people of Avadh and Allahabad before his death in 1754.

The Rajput States
•	Many Rajput states took advantage of the growing weakness of Mughal power to virtually free themselves from central control while at the same time increasing their influence in the rest of the Empire.

•	In the reigns of Farrukh Siyar and Muhammad Shah, the rulers of Amber and Marwar were appointed governors of important Mughal provinces such as Agra, Gujarat, and Malwa.

•	The internal politics of Agra, Gujarat, Malwa, etc. were often characterized by the same type of corruption, intrigue, and treachery as prevailed at the Mughal court.

•	Ajit Singh of Marwar was killed by his own son.

•	The most outstanding Rajput ruler of the 18th century was Raja Sawai Jai Singh of Amber (1681-1743).

•	Raja Sawai Jai Singh was a distinguished statesman, law-maker, and reformer. But most of all he shone as a man of science in an age when Indians were oblivious of scientific progress.
 


 
•	Raja Sawai Jai Singh founded the city of Jaipur in the territory taken from the
Jats and made it a great seat of science and art.

•	Jaipur was built upon strictly scientific principles and according to a regular plan. Its broad streets are intersected at right angles.

•	Jai Singh was a great astronomer. He erected observatories with accurate and advanced instruments, some of his inventions can be still observed at Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Varanasi, and Mathura. His astronomical observations were remarkably accurate.

•	Jai Singh drew up a set of tables, entitled Zij-i Muhammadshahi, to enable people to make astronomical observations. He had Euclid's "Elements of Geometry", translated into Sanskrit as also several works on trigonometry, and Napier's work on the construction and use of logarithms.
 

•	Jai Singh was also a social reformer. He tried to enforce a law to reduce the lavish expenditure which a Rajput had to incur on a daughter's wedding and which often led to infanticide.

•	This remarkable prince ruled Jaipur for nearly 44 years from 1699 to 1743.

The Jats
•	The Jats, a caste of agriculturists, lived in the region around Delhi, Agra, and Mathura.

•	Repression by Mughal officials drove the Jat peasants around Mathura to revolt. They revolted under the leadership of their Jat Zamindars in 1669 and then again in 1688.

•	Jats’ revolts were crushed, but the area remained disturbed. After the death of Aurangzeb, they created disturbances all around Delhi. Though originally a peasant uprising, the Jat revolt, led by zamindars, soon became predatory.

•	Jats plundered all and sundry, the rich and the poor, the jagirdars and the peasants, the Hindus and the Muslims.

•	The Jat state of Bharatpur was set up by Churaman and Badan Singh.

•	The Jat power reached its highest glory under Suraj Mal, who ruled from 1756 to 1763 and who was an extremely able administrator and soldier and a very wise statesman.

•	Suraj Mal extended his authority over a large area, which extended from the Ganga in the East to Chambal in the South, the Subah of Agra in the West to the Subah of Delhi in the North. His state included among others the districts of Agra, Mathura, Meerut, and Aligarh.

•	After the death of Suraj Mal in 1763, the Jat state declined and was split up among petty zamindars most of whom lived by plunder.

Bangash and Rohelas
•	Muhammad Khan Bangash, an Afghan adventure, established his control over the territory around Farrukhabad, between what are now Aligarh and Kanpur, during the reigns of Farrukh Siyar and Muhammad Shah.

•	Similarly, during the breakdown of administration following Nadir Shah's invasion, Ali Muhammad Khan carved out a separate principality, known as Rohilkhand, at the foothills of the Himalayas between the Ganga in the south and the Kumaon hills in the north with its capital first at Aolan in Bareilly and later at Rampur.
 



•	The Rohelas clashed constantly with Avadh, Delhi, and the Jats.

The Sikhs
•	Founded at the end of the 15th century by Guru Nanak, the Sikh religion spread among the Jat peasantry and other lower castes of Punjab.

•	The transformation of the Sikhs into a militant, fighting community was begun by Guru Hargobind (1606-1645).

•	It was, however, under the leadership of Guru Gobind Singh (1664-1708), the tenth and the last Guru of the Sikhs, that Sikhs became a political and military force.

•	From 1699 onwards, Guru Gobind Singh waged constant war against the armies of Aurangzeb and the hill rajas.
 

•	After Aurangzeb's death Guru Gobind Singh joined Bahadur Shah's camp as a noble of the rank of 5,000 Jat at and 5,000 sawar and accompanied him to the Deccan where he was treacherously murdered by one of his Pathan employees.

•	After Guru Gobind Singh's death, the institution of Guruship came to an end and the leadership of the Sikhs passed to his trusted disciple Banda Singh, who is more widely known as Banda Bahadur.

•	Banda rallied together the Sikh peasants of the Punjab and carried on a vigorous though unequal struggle against the Mughal army for eight years. He was captured in 1715 and put to death.

•	Banda Bahadur’s death gave a set-back to the territorial ambitions of the Sikhs and their power declined.
 

Punjab
•	At the end of the 18th century, Ranjit Singh, chief of the Sukerchakia Misl rose into prominence. A strong and courageous soldier, an efficient administrator, and a skillful diplomat, he was a born leader of men.

•	Ranjit Singh captured Lahore in 1799 and Amritsar in 1802. He soon brought all Sikh chiefs west of the Sutlej River under his control and established his own kingdom in the Punjab.

•	Ranjit Singh conquered Kashmir, Peshawar, and Multan. The old Sikh chiefs were transformed into big zamindars and jagirdars.

•	Ranjit Singh did not make any change in the system of lend revenue promulgated earlier by the Mughals. The amount of land revenue was calculated on the basis of 50 per cent of the gross produce.
 

•	Ranjit Singh built up a powerful, disciplined, and well-equipped army along European lines with the help of European instructors. His new army was not confined to the Sikhs. He also recruited Gurkhas, Biharis, Oriyas, Pathans, Dogras, and Punjabi Muslims.

•	Ranjit Singh set up the modern foundries to manufacture cannon at Lahore and employed Muslim gunners to man them. It is said that he possessed the second best army in Asia, the first was the army of the English East India Company.

Bengal
•	Taking advantage of the growing weakness of the central authority, two men of exceptional ability, Murshid Quli Khan and Alivardi Khan, made Bengal virtually independent. Even though Murshid Quli Khan was made Governor of Bengal as late as 1717, he had been its effective ruler since 1700, when he was appointed its Dewan.

•	Murshid Quli Khan soon freed himself from central control though he sent regular tribute to the Emperor. He established peace by freeing Bengal of internal and external danger.

•	The only three major uprisings during Murshid Quli Khan’s rule were:
 



i.	By Sitaram Ray,

ii.	By Udai Narayan, and

iii.	By Ghulam Muhammad.

•	Later Shujat Khan, and Najat Khan also rebelled during the Murshid Quli Khan’s reign.

•	Murshid Quli Khan died in 1727, and his son-in-law Shuja-ud-din ruled Bengal till 1739. In that year, Alivardi Khan deposed and killed Shuja-ud-din's son, Sarfaraz Khan, and made himself the Nawab.
 












Rise & Fall of Martha Empire
•	The most important challenge to the decaying Mughal power came from the Maratha Kingdom, which was the most powerful of the Succession states. In fact, it alone possessed the strength to fill the political vacuum created by the disintegration of the Mughal Empire.

•	The Maratha Kingdom produced a number of brilliant commanders and statesmen needed for the task. But the Maratha Sardars lacked unity, and they lacked the outlook and program, which were necessary for founding an all- India empire.

•	Shahu, the grandson of Shivaji, had been a prisoner in the hands of Aurangzeb since 1689.

•	Aurangzeb had treated Shahu and his mother with great dignity, honor, and consideration, paying full attention to their religious, caste, and other needs, hoping perhaps to arrive at a political agreement with Shahu.

•	Shahu was released in 1707 after Aurangzeb's death.

•	A civil war broke out between Shahu at Satara and his aunt Tara Bai at Kolhapur who had carried out an anti-Mughal struggle since 1700 in the name of her son Shivaji II after the death of her husband Raja Ram.

•	Maratha Sardars, each one of whom had a large following of soldiers loyal to themselves alone began to side with one or the other contender for power.

•	Maratha Sardars used this opportunity to increase their power and influence by bargaining with the two contenders for power. Several of them even intrigued with the Mughal viceroys of the Deccan.

Balaji Vishwanath
•	Arising out of the conflict between Shahu and his rival at Kolhapur, a new system of Maratha government was evolved under the leadership of Balaji Vishwanath, the Peshwa of King Shahu.

•	The period of Peshwa domination in Maratha history was the most remarkable in which the Maratha state was transformed into an empire.
 

•	Balaji Vishwanath, a Brahmin, started life as a petty revenue official and then rose step by step as an official.

•	Balaji Vishwanath rendered Shahu loyal and useful service in suppressing his enemies. He excelled in diplomacy and won over many of the big Maratha Sardars.

•	In 1713, Shahu made him his Peshwa or the mulk pradhan (chief minister).

•	Balaji Vishwanath gradually consolidated Shabu's hold and his own over Maratha Sardars and over most of Maharashtra except for the region south of Kolhapur where Raja Ram's descendants ruled.

•	The Peshwa concentrated power in his office and eclipsed the other ministers and' seniors.

•	Balaji Vishwanath took full advantage of the internal conflicts of the Mughal officials to increase Maratha power.

•	Balaji Vishwanath had induced Zulfiqar Khan to pay the chauth and
sardeshmukhi of the Deccan.
 

•	All the territories that had earlier formed Shivaji's kingdom were restored to Shahu who was also assigned the chauth and sardeshmukhi of the six provinces of the Deccan.

•	In 1719, Balaji Vishwanath, at the head of a Maratha force, accompanied Saiyid Hussain Ali Khan to Delhi and helped the Saiyid brothers in overthrowing Farrukh Siyar.

•	At Delhi, Balaji Vishwanath and the other Maratha Saradars witnessed at first hand the weakness of the Empire and were filled with the ambition of expansion in the North.

•	Balaji Vishwanath died in 1720 and his 20-year old son Baji Rao I succeeded as Peshwa. In spite of his youth, Baji Rao I was a bold and brilliant commander and an ambitious and clever statesman.

•	Baji Rao has been described as "the greatest exponent of guerrilla tactics after Shivaji".

•	Led by Baji Rao, the Marathas waged numerous campaigns against the Mughal Empire trying to compel the Mughal officials first to give them the right to collect the chauth of vast areas and then to cede these areas to the Maratha kingdom.

•	By 1740, when Baji Rao died, the Maratha had won control over Malwa, Gujarat, and parts of Bundelkhand. The Maratha families of Gaekwad, Holkar, Sindhia, and Bhonsle came into prominence during this period.

•	Baji Rao died in April 1740. In the short period of 20 years, he had changed the character of the Maratha state. From the kingdom of Maharashtra it had been transformed into an Empire expanding in the North (as shown in the map below).
 


 
•	Baji Rao's 18-year old son Balaji Baji Rao (also known as Nana Saheb) was the Peshwa from 1740 to 1761. He was as able as his father though less energetic.

•	King Shahu died in 1749 and by his will left all management of state affairs in the Peshwa's hands.

•	The office of the Peshwa had already become hereditary and the Peshwa was the de facto ruler of the state. Now Peshwa became the official head of the administration and, as a symbol of this fact, shifted the government to Poona, his headquarters.

•	Balaji Baji Rao followed in the footsteps of his father and further extended the Empire in different directions taking Maratha power to its height. Maratha armies now overran the whole of India.

•	Maratha control over Malwa, Gujarat, and Bundelkhand was consolidated.

•	Bengal was repeatedly invaded and, in 1751, the Nawab of Bengal had to cede Orissa.
 

•	In the South, the state of Mysore and other minor principalities were forced to pay tribute.

•	In 1760, the Nizam of Hyderabad was defeated at Udgir and was compelled to cede vast territories yielding an annual revenue of Rs. 62 lakhs.

•	Later, the arrival of Ahmad Shah Abdali and his alliance with the major kingdoms of North India (including an alliance with Najib-ud-daulah of Rohilkhand; Shuja-ud-daulah of Avadh, etc.) lead to third battle of Panipat (on January 14, 1761).

•	The Maratha army did not get any alliance and support resultantly was completely routed out in the third battle of Panipat.

•	The Peshwa's son, Vishwas Rao, Sadashiv Rao Bhau and numerous other Maratha commanders perished on the battle field as did nearly 28,000 soldiers. Those who fled were pursued by the Afghan cavalry and robbed and plundered by the Jats, Ahirs, and Gujars of the Panipat region.

•	The Peshwa, who was marching north to render help to his cousin, was stunned by the tragic news (i.e. defeat at Panipat). Already seriously ill, his end was hastened and he died in Jun 1761.

•	The Maratha defeat at Panipat was a disaster for them. They lost the cream of their army and their political prestige suffered a big blow.

•	Afghans did not get benefit from their victory. They could not even hold the Punjab. In fact, the Third Battle of Panipat did not decide who was to rule India, but rather who was not. The way was, therefore, cleared for the rise of the British power in India.

•	The 17-year old Madhav Rao became the Peshwa in 1761. He was a talented Soldier and statesman.

•	Within the short period of 11 years, Madhav Rao restored the lost fortunes of the Maratha Empire. He defeated the Nizam, compelled Haidar Ali of Mysore to pay tribute, and reasserted control over North India by defeating the Rohelas and subjugating the Rajput states and Jat chiefs.

•	In 1771, the Marathas brought back to Delhi Emperor Shah Alam who now became their pensioner.

•	Once again, however, a blow fell on the Marathas for Madhav Rao died of consumption in 1772.
 

•	The Maratha Empire was now in a state of confusion. At Poona there was a struggle for power between Reghunath Rao, the younger brother of Balaji Baji Rao, and Narayan Rao, the younger brother of Madhav Rao.

•	Narayan Rao was killed in 1773. He was succeeded by his posthumous son, Sawai Madhav Rao.

•	Out of frustration, Raghunath Rao approached to the British and tried to capture power with their help. This resulted in the First Anglo-Maratha War.

•	Sawai Madhav Rao died in 1795 and was succeeded by the utterly worthless Baji Rao II, son of Raghunath Rao.

•	The British had by now decided to put on end to the Maratha challenge to their supremacy in India.

•	The British divided the mutually-warring Maratha Sardars through clever diplomacy and then overpowered them in separate battles during the second Maratha War, 1803-1805, and the Third Maratha War, 1816-1819.

•	While other Maratha mates were permitted to remain as subsidiary states, the house of the Peshwas was extinguished.
 











•	India of the 18th century failed to make progress economically, socially, or culturally at a pace, which would have saved the country from collapse.

•	The increasing revenue demands of the state, the oppression of the officials, the greed and rapacity of the nobles, revenue-farmers, and zamindars, the marches and countermarches of the rival armies, and the depredations of the numerous adventurers roaming the land during the first half of the 18th century made the life of the people quite despicable.

•	India of those days, was also a land of contrasts. Extreme poverty existed side by side with extreme rich and luxury. On the one hand, there were the rich and powerful nobles steeped in luxury and comfort; on the other, backward, oppressed, and impoverished peasants living at the bare subsistence level and having to bear all sorts of injustices and inequities.

•	Even so, the life of the Indian masses was by and large better at this time than it was after over 100 years of British rule at the end of the 19th century.

Agriculture
•	Indian agriculture during the 18th century was technically backward and stagnant. The techniques of production had remained stationary for centuries.

•	The peasants tried to make up for technical backwardness by working very hard. They, In fact, performed miracles of production; moreover, they did not usually suffer from shortage of land. But, unfortunately, they seldom reaped the fruits of their labor.

•	Even though it was peasants’ produce that supported the rest of the society, their own reward was miserably inadequate.

Trade
•	Even though the Indian villages were largely self-sufficient and imported little from outside and the means of communication were backward, extensive trade within the country and between India and other countries of Asia and Europe was earned on under the Mughals.

•	India imported:

o	pearls, raw silk, wool, dates, dried fruits, and rose water from the Persian Gulf region;
 



o	coffee, gold, drugs, and honey from Arabia;

o	tea, sugar, porcelain, and silk from China;

o	gold, musk and woolen cloth from Tibet;

o	tin from Singapore;

o	spices, perfumes, attack, and sugar from the Indonesian islands;

o	ivory and drugs from Africa; and

o	woolen cloth, metals such as copper, iron, and lead, and paper from Europe.

•	India's most important article of export was cotton textiles, which were famous all over the world for their excellence and were in demand everywhere.

•	India also exported raw silk and silk fabrics, hardware, indigo, saltpeter, opium, rice, wheat, sugar, pepper and other spices, precious stones, and drugs.

•	Constant warfare and disruption of law and order, in many areas during the 18th century, banned the country's internal trade and disrupted its foreign trade to some extent and in some directions.

•	Many trading centers were looted by the Indians as well as by foreign invaders. Many of the trade routes were infested with organized bands of robbers, and traders and their caravans were regularly looted.
 

•	The road between the two imperial cities, Delhi and Agra, was made unsafe by the marauders. With the rise of autonomous provincial regimes and innumerable local chiefs, the number of custom houses or chowkies grew by leaps and bounds.

•	Every petty or large ruler tried to increase his income by imposing heavy customs duties on goods entering or passing though his territories.

•	The impoverishment of the nobles, who were the largest consumers of luxury products in which trade was conducted, also injured internal trade.

•	Many prosperous cities, centers of flourishing industry, were sacked and devastated.

o	Delhi was plundered by Nadir Shah;

o	Lahore, Delhi, and Mathura by Ahmad Shah Abdali;

o	Agra by the Jats;

o	Surat and other cities of Gujarat and the Deccan by Maratha chiefs;

o	Sarhind by the Sikhs, and so on.

•	The decline of internal and foreign trade also hit the industries hard in some parts of the country. Nevertheless, some industries in other parts of the country gained as a result of expansion in trade with Europe due to the activities of the European trading companies.

•	The important centers of textile industry were:

o	Dacca and Murshidabad in Bengal;

o	Patna in Bihar;

o	Surat, Ahmedabad, and Broach in Gujarat;

o	Chanderi in Madhya Pradesh;

o	Burhanpur in Maharashtra;

o	Jaunpur, Varanasi, Lucknow, and Agra in U.P.;

o	Multan and Lahore in Punjab;

o	Masulipatam, Aurangabad, Chicacole, and Vishakhapatnam in Andhra;
 

o	Bangalore in Mysore; and

o	Coimbatore and Madurai in Madras.

•	Kashmir was a center of woolen manufactures.

•	Ship-building industry flourished in Maharashtra, Andhra, and Bengal.
 












•	Social life and culture in the 18th century were marked by stagnation and dependence on the past.

•	There was, of course, no uniformity of culture and social patterns all over the country. Nor did all Hindus and all Muslims form two distinct societies.

•	People were divided by religion, region, tribe, language, and caste.

•	Moreover, the social life and culture of the upper classes, who formed a tiny minority of the total population, was in many respects different from the life and culture of the lower classes.

Hindu
•	Caste was the central feature of the social life of the Hindus.

•	Apart from the four vanes, Hindus were divided into numerous castes (Jatis), which differed in their nature from place to place.

•	The caste system rigidly divided people and permanently fixed their place in the social scale.

•	The higher castes, headed by the Brahmins, monopolized all social prestige and privileges.

•	Caste rules were extremely rigid. Inter-caste marriages were forbidden.

•	There were restrictions on inter-dining among members of different castes.

•	In some cases, persons belonging to higher castes would not take food touched by persons of the lower castes.

•	Castes often determined' the choice of ' profession, though exceptions did occur. Caste regulations were strictly enforced by caste councils and panchayats and caste chiefs through fines, penances (prayaschitya) and expulsion from the caste.

•	Caste was a major divisive force and element of disintegration in India of 18th century.
 
Indian History

Muslim
•	Muslims were no less divided by considerations of caste, race, tribe, and status, even though their religion enjoined social equality.

•	The Shia and Sunni (two sects of Muslim religion) nobles were sometimes at loggerheads on account of their religious differences.

•	The Irani, Afghan, Turani, and Hindustani Muslim nobles, and officials often stood apart from each other.

•	A large number of Hindus converted to Islam carried their caste into the new religion and observed its distinctions, though not as rigidly as before.

•	Moreover, the sharif Muslims consisting of nobles, scholars, priests, and army officers, looked down upon the ajlaf Muslims or the lower class Muslims in a manner similar to that adopted by the higher caste Hindus towards the lower caste Hindus.
 











•	The family system in the 18th century India was primarily patriarchal, that is, the family was dominated by the senior male member, and inheritance was through the male line.

•	In Kerala, however, the family was matrilineal. Outside Kerala, women were subjected to nearly complete male control.

•	Women were expected to live as mothers and wives only, though in these roles they were shown a great deal of respect and honor.

•	Even during war and anarchy, women were seldom molested and were treated with respect.
 

•	A European traveler, Abbe J.A. Dubois, commented, at the beginning of the 19th century:

"A Hindu woman can go anywhere alone, even in the most crowded places, and she need never fear the impertinent looks and jokes of idle loungers. A
house inhabited solely by women is a sanctuary which the most shameless libertine would not dream of violating.'
•	The women of the time possessed title individuality of their own. This does not mean that there were no exceptions to this rule. Ahilya Bai administered Indore with great success from 1766 to 1796.

•	Many Hindu and Muslim ladies played important roles in 18th century politics.

•	While women of the upper classes were not supposed to work outside their homes, peasant women usually worked in the fields and women of the poorer classes often worked outside their homes to supplement the family income.

•	The purdah was common mostly among the higher classes in the North. It was not practiced in the South.

•	Boys and girls were not permitted to mix with each other.

•	All marriages were arranged by the heads of the families. Men were permitted to have more than one wife, but except for the well-off, they normally had only one.

•	On the other hand, a woman was expected to marry only once in her life-time.

•	The custom of early marriage prevailed all over the country.

•	Sometimes children were married when they were only three or four years of age.

•	Among the upper classes, the evil customs of incurring heavy expenses on marriages and of giving dowry to the bride prevailed.

•	The evil of dowry was especially widespread in Bengal and Rajputana culture.

•	In Maharashtra, it was curbed to some extent by the energetic steps taken by the Peshwas.

•	Two great social evils of the 18th century India, apart from the caste system, were the custom of sati and the harrowing condition of widows.

•	Sati involved the rite of a Hindu widow burning herself (self-immolation) along with the body of her dead husband.
 


 

•	Sati practice was mostly prevalent in Rajputana, Bengal, and other parts of northern India. In the South it was uncommon: and the Marathas did not encourage it.

•	Even in Rajputana and Bengal, it was practiced only by the families of rajas, chiefs, big zamindars, and upper castes.

•	Widows belonging to the higher classes and higher castes could not remarry, though in some regions and in some castes, for example, among non-Brahmins in Maharashtra, the Jats and people of the hill-regions of the North, widow remarriage was quite common.

•	There were all sorts of restrictions on her clothing, diet, movements, etc. In general, she was expected to renounce all the pleasures of the earth and to serve selflessly the members of her husband's or her brother's family, depending on where she spent the remaining years of her life.

•	Raja Sawai Jai Singh of Amber and the Maratha General Prashuram Bhau tried to promote widow remarriage but failed.
 











•	Culturally, India showed signs of exhaustion during the 18th century. But at the same time, culture remained wholly traditionalist as well as some development took place.

•	Many of the painters of the Mughal School migrated to provincial courts and flourished at Hyderabad, Lucknow, Kashmir, and Patna.

•	The paintings of Kangra and Rajput Schools revealed new vitality and taste.

•	In the field of architecture, the Imambara of Lucknow reveals proficiency in technique.

•	The city of Jaipur and its buildings are an example of continuing vigor.

•	Music continued to develop and flourish in the 18th century. Significant progress was made in this field in the reign of Mohammad Shah.
 
Indian History

Literary Works
•	Poetry in reality, all the Indian languages lost its touch with life and became decorative, artificial, mechanical, and traditional.

•	A noteworthy feature of the literary life of the 18th century was the spread of Urdu language and the vigorous growth of Urdu poetry.

•	Urdu gradually became the medium of social intercourse among the upper classes of northern India.

•	The 18th century Kerala also witnessed the full development of Kathakali
literature, drama, and dance.

•	Tayaumanavar (1706-44) was one of the best exponents of sittar poetry in Tamil. In line with other poets, he protested against the abuses of temple-rule and the caste system.

•	In Assam, literature developed under the patronage of the Ahom kings.

•	Heer Ranjha, the famous romantic epic in Punjabi, was composed at this time by Warris Shah.

•	For Sindhi literature, the 18th century was a period of enormous achievement.

•	Shah Abdul Latif composed his famous collection of poems.
 











•	Cultural activities of the time were mostly financed by the Royal Court, rulers, and nobles and chiefs whose impoverishment led to their gradual neglect.

•	Friendly relations between Hindus and Muslims were a very healthy feature of life in 18th century.

•	Politics were secular in spite of having fights and wars among the chiefs of the two groups (Hindus and Muslims).

•	There was little communal bitterness or religious intolerance in the country.

•	The common people in the villages and towns who fully shared one another’s joys and sorrows, irrespective of religious affiliations.

•	Hindu writers often wrote in Persian while Muslim writers wrote in Hindi, Bengali, and other vernaculars.

•	The development of Urdu language and literature provided a new meeting ground between Hindus and Muslims.

•	Even in the religious sphere, the mutual influence, and respect that had been developing in the last few centuries as result of the spread of the Bhakti movement among Hindus and Sufism among Muslim saints was the great example of unity.

Education
•	Education was not completely neglected in 18th century India, but it was on the whole defective.

•	It was traditional and out of touch with the rapid developments in the West. The knowledge which it imparted was confined to literature, law, religion, philosophy, and logic, and excluded the study of physical and natural sciences, technology, and geography.

•	In all fields original thought was discouraged and reliance placed on the ancient learning.

•	The centers of higher education were spread all over the country and were usually financed by nawabs, rajas, and rich zamindars.
 
Indian History

•	Among the Hindus, higher education was based on Sanskrit learning and was mostly confined to Brahmins.

•	Persian education being based on the official language of the time was equally popular among Hindus and Muslims.

•	A very pleasant aspect of education then was that the teachers enjoyed high prestige in the community. However, a bad feature of it was that girls were seldom given education, though some women of the higher classes were an exception.
 











•	India's trade relations with Europe go back to the ancient days of the Greeks. During the middle Ages, trade between Europe and India and South-East Asia was carried through various routes.

Trade Routes
•	Major trade routes were:

i.	Through sea - along the Persian Gulf;

ii.	Through land- through Iraq and Turkey, and then again by sea to Venice and Genoa;

iii.	Third was via the Red Sea and then overland to Alexandria in Egypt and from there again by sea to Venice and Genoa.

iv.	The fourth one was less used i.e. overland route through the passes of the North-West frontier of India, across Central Asia, and Russia to the Baltic.

•	The Asian part of the trade was carried on mostly by Arab merchants and sailors, while the Mediterranean and European part was the virtual monopoly of the Italians.
 

•	Goods from Asia to Europe passed through many states and many hands. Every state levied tolls and duties while every merchant made a substantial profit.

•	There were many other obstacles, such as pirates and natural calamities on the way. Yet the trade remained highly profitable. This was mostly due to the pressing demand of the European people for Eastern spices.

•	The Europeans needed spices because they lived on salted and peppered meat during the winter months, when there was little grass to feed the cattle, and only a liberal use of spices could make this meat palatable. Consequently, European food was as highly spiced as Indian food till the 17th century.

•	The old trading routes between the East and the West came under Turkish control after the Ottoman conquest of Asia Minor and the capture of Constantinople in 1453.

•	The merchants of Venice and Genoa monopolized the trade between Europe and Asia and refused to let the new nation states of Western Europe, particularly Spain, and Portugal, have any share in the trade through these old routes.

•	The trade with India and Indonesia was highly prized by the West Europeans to be so easily given up.

•	The demand for spices was pressing and the profits to be made in their trade inviting.

•	The reputedly fabulous wealth of India was an additional attraction as there was an acute shortage of gold all over Europe, and gold was essential as a medium of exchange if the trade was to grow unhampered.

•	The West European states and merchants therefore began to search for new and safer sea routes to India and the Spice Islands of Indonesia, (at that time popular as the East Indies).

•	The West Europeans wanted to break the Arab and Venetian trade monopolies, to bypass Turkish hostility, and to open direct trade relations with the East.

•	The West European were well-equipped to do so as great advances in ship- building and the science of navigation had taken place during the 15th century. Moreover, the Renaissance had generated a great spirit of adventure among the people of Western Europe.
 

•	The first steps were taken by Portugal and Spain whose seamen, sponsored and controlled by their governments, began a great era of geographical discoveries.

•	In 1494, Columbus of Spain set out to reach India and discovered America instead of India.

 











•	In 1498, Vasco da Gama of Portugal discovered a new and all-sea route from Europe to India. He sailed around Africa via the Cape of Good Hope (South Africa) and reached Calicut (as shown in the map given below).

•	Vasco da Gama returned with a cargo, which sold for 60 times the cost of his voyage.

•	Columbus and Vasco da Gama’s sea routes along with other navigational discoveries opened a new chapter in the history of the world.

•	Adam Smith wrote later that the discovery of America and the Cape route to India were "the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind."

•	The new continent was rich in precious metals. Its gold and silver poured into Europe where they powerfully stimulated trade and provided some of the
 

capital, which was soon to make European nations the most advanced in trade, industry, and science.

•	America became a new and inexhaustible market for European manufacturers.

•	Some other source of early capital accumulation or enrichment for European countries was their penetration into African land in the middle of the 15th century.
•	In the beginning, gold and ivory of Africa had attracted the foreigner. Very soon, however, trade with Africa concentrated on the slave trade.

•	In the 16th century, this trade was a monopoly of Spain and Portugal; later it was dominated by Dutch, French, and British merchants.

•	Year after year (particularly after 1650), thousands of Africans were sold as slaves in the West Indies and in North and South America.

•	The slave ships carried manufactured goods from Europe to Africa, exchanged them on the coast of Africa for Negroes, took these slaves across the Atlantic and exchanged them for the colonial produce of plantations or mines, and finally brought back and sold this produce in Europe.

•	While no exact record of the number of Africans sold into slavery exists, historians' estimate, ranged between 15 and 50 million.

•	Slavery was later abolished in the 19th century after it had ceased to play an important economic role, but it was openly defended and praised as long as it was profitable.
 



•	Monarchs, ministers, members of Parliament, dignitaries of the church, leaders of public opinion, and merchants and industrialists supported the slave trade.

•	On the other hand, in Britain, Queen Elizabeth, George III, Edmund Burke, Nelson, Gladstone, Disraeli, and Carlyle were some of the defenders and apologists of slavery.

•	Portugal had a monopoly of the highly profitable Eastern trade for nearly a century. In India, Portugal established her trading settlements at Cochin, Goa, Diu, and Daman.

•	From the beginning, the Portuguese combined the use of force with trade and they were helped by the superiority of their armed ships which enabled them to dominate the seas.

•	Portuguese also saw that they could take advantage of the mutual rivalries of the Indian princes to strengthen their position.

•	Portuguese intervened in the conflict between the rulers of Calicut and Cochin to establish their trading centers and forts on the Malabar Coast. Likewise, they attacked and destroyed Arab shipping, brutally killing hundreds of Arab merchants and seamen. By threatening Mughal shipping, they also succeeded in securing many trading concessions from the Mughal Emperors.

•	Under the viceroyalty of Alfanso d’ Albuquerque, who captured Goa in 1510, the Portuguese established their domination over the entire Asian land from Hormuz in the Persian Gulf to Malacca in Malaya and the Spice Islands in Indonesia.

 

•	Portuguese seized Indian territories on the coast and waged constant war to expand their trade and dominions and safeguard their trade monopoly from their European rivals.

•	In the words of James Mill (the famous British historian of the 19th century): "The Portuguese followed their merchandise as their chief occupation, but like the English and the Dutch of the same period, had no objection to plunder, when it fell in their way."

•	The Portuguese were intolerant and fanatical in religious matters. They indulged in forcible conversion offering people the alternative of Christianity or sword.

•	Portuguese approach was particularly hateful to people of India (where the religious tolerance was the rule). They also indulged in inhuman cruelties and lawlessness.

•	In spite of their barbaric behavior, Portuguese possessions in India survived for a century because:

a.	They (Portuguese) enjoyed control over the high seas;
 

b.	Their soldiers and administrators maintained strict discipline; and

c.	They did not have to face the fight of the Mughal Empire as South India was outside Mughal influence.

•	Portuguese clashed with the Mughal power in Bengal in 1631 and were driven out of their settlement at Hugli.

•	The Portuguese and the Spanish had left the English and the Dutch far behind during the 15th century and the first half of the 16th century. But, in the latter half of the 16th century, England and Holland, and later France, all growing commercial and naval, powers, waged a fierce struggle against the Spanish and Portuguese monopoly of world trade.

•	Portuguese hold over the Arabian Sea had been weakened by the English and their influence in Gujarat had become negligible.

Decline of Portuguese
•	Portugal was, however, incapable of maintaining for long its trade monopoly or its dominion in the East because of:

a.	Its population was less than a million;

b.	Its Court was autocratic and decadent;

c.	Its merchants enjoyed much less power and prestige than its landed aristocrats;

d.	It lagged behind in the development of shipping, and

e.	It followed a polity of religious intolerance.

f.	It became a Spanish dependency in 1530.

g.	In 1588, the English defeated the Spanish fleet called the Armada and shattered Spanish naval supremacy forever.
 











•	The weakening of Portuguese enabled the English and the Dutch merchants to use the Cape of Good Hope route to India and so to join in the race for empire in the East.

•	At the end, the Dutch gained control over Indonesia and the British over India, Ceylon, and Malaya.

•	In 1595, four Dutch ships sailed to India via the Cape of Good Hope.

•	In 1602, the Dutch East India Company was formed and the Dutch States General (the Dutch parliament) gave it a Charter empowering it to make war, conclude treaties, acquire territories, and build fortresses.

•	The main interest of Dutch was not in India, but in the Indonesian Islands of Java, Sumatra, and the Spice Islands where spices were produced.

•	Dutch forced back the Portuguese from the Malay Straits and the Indonesian Islands and, in 1623, defeated English who attempted to establish themselves on the islands.

•	In the first half of 17th century, Dutch had successfully seized the most important profitable part of Asian trade.

•	Dutch also established trading depots at:
 
Indian History

a.	Surat, Broach, Cambay, and Ahmadabad in Gujarat;

b.	Cochin in Kerala;

c.	Nagapatam in Madras;

d.	Masulipatam in Andhra

e.	Chinsura in Bengal;

f.	Patna in Bihar; and

g.	Agra in Uttar Pradesh.

h.	In 1658, also conquered Ceylon from the Portuguese.

•	Dutch exported indigo, raw silk, cotton textiles, saltpeter, and opium from India.

•	Like the Portuguese, Dutch treated the people of India with cruelty and exploited them ruthlessly.
 











•	An English association or company to trade with the East was formed in 1599 under the auspices of a group of merchants known as the Merchant Adventurers. The company was granted a Royal Charter and the exclusive privilege to trade in the East by Queen Elizabeth on 31 December 1600. The company was named as the East India Company.

•	From the beginning, it was linked with the monarchy: Queen Elizabeth (1558- 1603) was one of the shareholders of the company.

•	The first voyage of the English East India Company was made in 1601 when its ships sailed to the Spice Islands of Indonesia.

•	In 1608, a factory was established at Surat, on the West coast of India and sent Captain Hawkins to Jahangir’s Court to obtain Royal favors.

•	Initially, Hawkins was received in a friendly manner. He was given a mansab and a jagir. Later, he was expelled from Agra as a result of Portuguese intrigue. This convinced the English (need) to overcome Portuguese influence at the Mughal Court if they were to obtain any concessions from the Imperial Government.
 



•	English defeated a Portuguese naval squadron at Swally near Surat in 1612 and then again in 1614. These victories led the Mughals to hope that in view of their naval weakness, they could use the English to counter the Portuguese on the sea.


•	In 1615, English ambassador Sir Thomas Roe reached the Mughal Court (shown in the image given above) and exerted pressure on the Mughal authorities by taking advantage of India's naval weakness. English merchants also harassed the Indian traders while shipping through the Red Sea and to Mecca. Thus, combining entreaties with threats, Roe succeeded in getting an imperial Farman to trade and establish factories in all parts of the Mughal Empire.

•	Roe's success further angered the Portuguese and a fierce naval battle between the two countries began in 1620 that ended with English victory.

•	Hostilities between the English and Portuguese came to an end in 1630.
 



•	In 1662, the Portuguese gave the Island of Bombay to King Charles II of England as dowry for marrying with a Portuguese Princess.

•	Eventually, the Portuguese lost all their possessions in India except Goa, Diu, and Daman.

•	The English Company fell out with the Dutch Company over division of the spice trade of the Indonesian Islands. Finally, the Dutch nearly expelled the English from the trade of the Spice Islands and the later were compelled to concentrate on India where the situation was more favorable to them.

•	The intermittent war in India between the English and the Dutch had begun in 1654 and ended in 1667; when the English gave up all claims to Indonesia while the Dutch agreed to leave alone the English settlements in India.

•	The English, however, continued their efforts to drive out the Dutch from the Indian trade and by 1795, they had expelled the Dutch from their last possession in India.

•	The English East India Company had very humble beginnings in India. Surat was the center of its trade till 1687.

•	Throughout the trading period, the English refrained petitioners before the Mughal authorities. By 1623, they had established factories at Surat, Broach, Ahmedabad, Agra, and Masulipatam.
 











•	The English East Company had very humble beginnings in India. Surat was the center of its trade till 1687.

The Beginning and Growth of East India Company

•	By 1623, English East India Company had established factories at Surat, Broach, Ahmedabad, Agra, and Masulipatam.

•	From the very beginning, the English trading company tried to combine trade and diplomacy with war and control of the territory where their factories were situated.

•	In 1625, the East India Company's authorities at Surat made an attempt to fortify their factory, but the chiefs of the English factory were immediately imprisoned and put in irons by the local authorities of the Mughal Empire.

•	The Company's English rivals made piratical attacks on Mughal shipping, the Mughal authorities imprisoned the President of the Company in retaliation at Surat and members of his Council and released them only on payment of
£18,000.

•	Conditions in the South India were more favorable to the English, as they did not have to face a strong Indian Government there.

•	The English opened their first factory in the South at Masulipatam in 1611. But they soon shifted the center of their activity to Madras the lease of which was granted to them by the local king in 1639.

•	The English built a small fort around their factory called Fort St. George in Madras (shown in the image given below).
 


 

•	By the end of the 17th century, the English Company was claiming full sovereignty over Madras and was ready to fight in, defence of the claim. Interestingly enough, from the very beginning, English Company of profit seeking merchants was also determined to make Indians pay for the conquest of their own country.

•	In Eastern India, the English Company had opened its first factories in Orissa in 1633.

•	English Company was given permission to trade at Hugli in Bengal. It soon opened factories at Patna, Balasore, Dacca, and other places in Bengal and Bihar.

•	Englishmen’s easy success in trade and in establishing independent and fortified settlements at Madras and at Bombay, and the preoccupation of Aurangzeb with the anti-Maratha campaigns led the English to abandon the role of humble petitioners.

•	English Company now dreamt of establishing political power in India, which would enable them to compel the Mughals to allow them a free hand in trade, to force Indians to sell cheap and buy costly goods.

•	Hostilities between the English and the Mughal Emperor broke out in 1686, after the former had sacked Hugli and declared war on the Emperor. But the English had seriously miscalculated the situation and underestimated Mughal strength.
 

•	The Mughal Empire under Aurangzeb was even now more than a match for the petty forces of the East India Company. The war proved disastrous to the English.

•	The English were driven out of their factories in Bengal and compelled to seek protection in a fever-stricken island at the mouth of the Ganga.

•	Their factories at Surat, Masulipatam, and Vishikhapatam were seized and their fort at Bombay besieged.

•	Having discovered that they were not yet strong enough to fight with the Mughal power, the English once again became humble petitioners and submitted "that the ill crimes they have done may be pardoned."

•	Once again they relied on flattery and humble entreaties to get trading concessions from the Mughal Emperor. The Mughal authorities readily pardoned the English folly as they had no means of knowing that these harmless-looking foreign traders would one day pose a serious threat to the country.

•	English, though weak on land, were, because of their naval supremacy, capable of completely ruining Indian trade and shipping to Iran, West Asia, Northern and Eastern Africa, and East Asia.

•	Aurangzeb therefore permitted them to resume trade on payment of Rs. 150,000 as compensation.

•	In 1691, the Company was granted exemption from the payment of custom duties in Bengal in return for Rs. 3,000 a year.

•	In 1698, the Company acquired the zamindari of the three villages Sutanati, Kalikata, and Govindpur where the English built Fort William around its factory. These villages soon grew into a city, which came to be known as Calcutta (now Kolkata).

•	During the first half of the 18th century, Bengal was ruled by strong Nawabs
namely Murshid Quli Khan and Alivardi Khan.

•	Nawabs of Bengal exercised strict control over the English traders and prevented them from misusing their privileges. Nor did they allow them to strengthen fortifications at Calcutta or to rule the city independently.
 

•	British settlements in Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta became the nuclei of flourishing cities. Large numbers of Indian merchants and bankers were attracted to these cities.

•	People attracted towards Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta partly due to the new commercial opportunities available in these cities and partly due to the unsettled condition and insecurity outside them, caused by the break-up of the Mughal Empire.

•	By the middle of the 18th century, the population of Madras had increased to 300,000, of Calcutta 200,000, and of Bombay to 70,000. It should also be noted that these three cities contained fortified English settlements; they also had immediate access to the sea where English naval power remained far superior to that of the Indians.

•	In case of conflict with any Indian authority, the English could always escape from these cities to the sea. And when a suitable opportunity arose for them to take advantage of the political disorders in the country, they could use these strategic cities as spring-boards for the conquest of India.
 











•	The Charter of 1600 granted the East India Company the exclusive privilege of trading East of the Cape of Good Hope for a period of 15 years.

•	The Charter provided for the management of the Company by a committee consisting of a Governor, a Deputy-Governor, and 24 members to be elected by a general body of the merchants forming the Company. This committee later on came to be known as the 'Court of Directors' and its members as 'Directors'.

•	The East Indian Company soon became the most important trading company of England. Between 1601 and 1612 its rate of profit recorded about 20 per cent per annum.

•	Profits of the East Indian Company were derived both from trade and from piracy, there was no clear dividing line between the two at the time.

•	In 1612, the Company made a profit of £ 1,000,000 on a capital of 200,000.

•	The Company was a strictly closed corporation or a monopoly. No non-member was allowed to trade with the East or to share in its high profits.

•	From the very beginning, the English manufacturers and those merchants who could not secure a place in the ranks of the monopoly companies carried on a vigorous campaign against royal monopolies like the Fast India Company. But the monarchs threw their influence behind the big companies who gave heavy bribes to them and to other influential political leaders.

•	From 1609 to 1676, the Company gave loans amounting to £ 170,000 to Charles II. In return, Charles II granted it a series of Charters confirming its previous privileges, empowering it to build forts, raise troops, make war and peace with the powers of the East, and authorizing its servants in India to administer justice to all Englishmen and others living in English settlements. Thus the Company occulted extensive military and judicial powers.

•	Many English merchants continued to trade in Asia in spite of the monopoly of the East India Company. They called themselves 'Free Merchants' while the Company called them Interlopers.'

•	The Interlopers in the end, compelled the Company to take them into partnership.
 



•	A change of fortunes occurred in 1688 when Parliament became supreme in England as a result of the Revolution of 1688, which overthrew the Stuart king James II and invited William III and his wife Mary to be the joint sovereign of Britain.

•	The "Free Merchants" now began to press their case on the public and the Parliament. But the Company defended itself by giving heavy bribes to the King, his ministers, and members of the Parliament. In one year alone it spent 80,000 on bribes, giving the King £ 10,000. In the end, they secured a new Charter in 1693.

•	The time was running against the Company; its success was short-lived. In 1694, the House of Commons passed a Resolution that "a subjects of England have equal rights to trade in the East Indies, unless prohibited by Act of Parliament."

•	The rivals of the Company founded another Company and gave a loan of £ 2,000,000 to the Government at a time when the Old Company could offer only
£ 700,000. Consequently, the Parliament granted the monopoly of trade with the East to the New Company.

•	The Old Company refused to give up its profitable trade so easily. It bought large shares in the New Company to be able to influence its policies. At the
 

same time, its servants in India refused to let the servants of the New Company carry on trade.

•	Both the New and Old companies faced ruin as a result of their mutual conflict. Finally, in 1702, the two deckled to join forces and together formed a united company.

•	The new company entitled as 'The Limited Company of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies' came into existence in 1708.

Company’s Factories in India
•	As the East India Company gradually grew in power and tended to acquire the status of a sovereign state in India, the organization of its factories in India too changed and developed accordingly.

•	A factory of the Company was generally a fortified area within which the warehouses (stores), offices, and houses of the Company's employees were situated.

•	The Company's servants were divided into three ranks:

a.	Writers,

b.	Factors, and

c.	Merchants.

•	All three ranked employees lived and dined together as if in a hostel and at Company's cost.

•	The Factory with its trade was administered by a Governor-in-Council. The Governor was merely the President of the Council and had no power apart from the Council which took decisions by a majority vote. The Council consisted of senior merchants of the Company.
 












Introduction
•	In Southern India, however, conditions were gradually becoming favorable to foreign adventurers, as the central authority had disappeared there after the death of Aurangzeb (1707) and Nizam-ul-Mulk Asaf Jah (1748).

•	The Maratha chiefs regularly invaded Hyderabad and the rest of the South for collecting Chauth (tax).

•	The absence of central power gave the foreigners an opportunity to expand their political influence and control over the affairs of the South Indian states.

•	For nearly 20 years from 1744 to 1763, the French and the English were to wage a bitter war for control over the trade, wealth, and territory of India.

•	The French East India Company was founded in 1664. It made rapid progress and it was reorganized in the 1720's and soon began to catch up with the English Company.

•	It was firmly established at Chandernagore near Calcutta and Pondicherry on the East Coast.

•	The French Company had some other factories at several ports on the East and the West coasts. It had also acquired control over the islands of Mauritius and Reunion in the Indian Ocean.

•	The French East India Company was heavily dependent on the French Government, which helped it by giving it treasury grants, subsidies, and loan, etc.

•	The French East India Company was largely controlled by the Government, which appointed its directors after 1723.

•	The French state of the time was autocratic, semi-feudal, and unpopular and sniffled from corruption, inefficiency, and instability.

•	Instead of being forward-looking, it was decadent, bound by tradition, and in general unsuited to the times. Control by such a state could not but be injurious to the interests of the Company.
 

•	In 1742, war broke out in Europe between France and England. One of the major causes of the war was rivalry over colonies in America. Another was their trade rivalry in India. This rivalry was intensified by the knowledge that the Mughal Empire was disintegrating and so the prize of trade or territory was likely to be much bigger than in the past.

•	Anglo-French conflict in India lasted for nearly 20 years and led to the establishment of British power in India.

•	The English Company was the wealthier of the two because of its superiority in trade. It also possessed naval superiority.

•	In 1745, the English navy captured French ships off the South-east coast of India and threatened Pondicherry.

Dupleix
•	Dupleix, the French Governor-General at Pondicherry, was a statesman of genius and imagination. Under his brilliant leadership, the French retaliated and occupied Madras in 1746.
 


 

•	After defeated by France, the British appealed to the Nawab of Carnatic (in whose territory Madras was situated), to save their settlement from the French.

•	The Nawab sent an army against the French to stop the two foreign trading companies from fighting on his soil. And so the 10,000 strong armies of the Nawab clashed with a small French force, consisting of 230 Europeans and 700 Indian soldiers trained along Western lines, at St. Thorne on the banks of the Adyar River.

•	The Nawab was decisively defeated. This battle revealed the immense superiority of Western armies over Indian armies because of their better equipment and organization.

•	In 1748, the general war between England and France ended and, as a part of the peace settlement, Madras was restored to the English.
 

•	In the Carnatic, Chanda Sahib began to conspire against the Nawab, Anwaruddin, while in Hyderabad the death of Asaf Jah (Nizam-ul-Mulk), was followed by civil war between his son Nash Jang and his grandson Muzaffar Jang.

•	Dupleix seized concluded a secret treaty with Chanda Sahib and Muzaffar Jang to help them with his well-trained French and Indian forces.

•	In 1749, the three allies defeated and killed Anwaruddin in a battle at Ambur.

•	Carnatic passed under the dominion of Chanda Sahib who rewarded the French with a grant of 80 villages around Pondicherry.

•	In Hyderabad, the French were successful. Nasir Jung was killed and Muzaffar Jang became the Nizam or Viceroy of the Deccan.

•	Muzaffar Jang rewarded the French Company by giving territories near Pondicherry as well as the famous town of Masulipatam.

•	Dupleix stationed his best officer, Bussy, at Hyderabad with a French army. While the ostensible purpose of this arrangement was to protect the Nizam from enemies, it was really aimed at maintaining French influence at his court.

•	While Muzaffar Jang was marching towards his capital, he was accidentally killed. Bussy immediately raised Salabat Jang, the third son of Nizam-ul-Mulk, to the throne.

•	Salabat Jang, in return, granted the French the area in Andhra known as the Northern Sarkars, consisting of the four districts of Mustafanagar, Ellore, Rajahmundry, and Chicacole.

•	The French had started out by trying to win Indian states as friends; they had ended by making them clients or satellites. But the English had not been silent spectators of their rival's successes. To offset French influence and to increase their own, they (British) had been intriguing with Nasir Jung and Muhammad Ali.

•	In 1750, British decided to throw their entire strength behind Muhammad Ali.

•	Robert Clive, a young clerk in the Company's service, proposed that French pressure on Muhammad Ali, besieged at Trichinopoly, could be released by attacking Arcot, the capital of Carnatic. The proposal accepted and Clive assaulted and occupied Arcot with only 200 English and 300 Indian Soldiers.
 

•	Dupleix made strenuous attempts to reverse the tide of French misfortunes. But he was given little support by the French Government or even by the higher authorities of the French East India Company.

•	In the end, the French Government, weary of the heavy expense of the war in India and fearing the loss of its American colonies, initiated peace negotiations and agreed in 1754 to the English demand for the recall of Dupleix from India.

•	The temporary peace between the two Companies (British and France) ended in 1756 when another war between England and France broke out.

•	The French Government made a determined attempt to oust the English from India and sent a strong force headed by Count de Lally, it was all in vain.

•	The French fleet was driven off Indian waters and the French forces in the Carnatic were defeated.

•	The English replaced the French as the Nizam’s protectors and secured from him Muslipatam and the Northern Sarkar.

•	The decisive battle was fought at Wandiwash on 22 January 1760 when the English General Eyre Coot defeated Lally. The war ended in 1763 with the signing of the Treaty of Paris.

•	The French factories in India were restored but they could no longer be fortified or even adequately garrisoned with troops. They could serve only as centers of trade; and now the French lived in India under British protection.
 











•	The British conquest India strategically i.e. one after another.

The British Occupation of Bengal
•	The beginning of British political influence over India may be traced to the battle of Plassey in 1757, when the English East India Company's forces defeated Siraj-ud-Daulah, the Nawab of Bengal.

•	As result of the Battle of Plassey, the English proclaimed Mir Jafar the Nawab of Bengal and set out to gather the reward i.e. the company was granted undisputed right to free trade in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa.

•	The East Company received the zamindari of the 24 Parganas near Calcutta. Mir Jafar paid a sum of Rs 17,700,000 as compensation for the attack on Calcutta and the traders of the city.

•	The battle of Plassey was of immense historical importance, as it paved the way for the British mastery on Bengal and eventually on the whole of India.

•	The victory of Plassey enabled the Company and its servants to amass untold wealth at the cost of the helpless people of Bengal.
 

•	Mir Qasim realized that if these abuses continued he could never hope to make Bengal strong or free himself of the Company’s control. He therefore took the drastic step of abolishing all duties on internal trade.

•	Mir Qasim was defeated in a series of battles in 1763 and fled to Avadh where he formed an alliance with Shuja-ud-Daulah, the Nawab of Avadh, and Shah Alam II, the fugitive Mughal Emperor.

•	The three allies clashed with the Company’s army at Buxar on 22 October 1764 and were thoroughly defeated.

•	The result of Buxar battle firmly established the British as masters of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa and placed Avadh at their mercy.

Dual Administrative System in Bengal
•	The East India Company became the real master of Bengal from 1765. Its army was in sole control of its defence and the supreme political power was in its hands.

•	The Nawab of Bengal became dependent for his internal and external security on the British.

•	The virtual unity of the two branches of Government under British control was signified by the fact that the same person acted in Bengal as the Deputy Diwan on behalf of the Company and as Deputy Subedar on behalf of the Nawab. This arrangement is known in history as the Dual or Double Government.

•	Dual system of administration of Bengal held a great advantage for the British: they had power without the responsibility.

•	British controlled the finances of Bengal and its army directly and its administration indirectly.

•	The Nawab and his officials had the responsibility of administration, but not the power to discharge it.

•	The consequences of double government for the people of Bengal were disastrous: neither the Company nor the Nawab cared for their welfare.

•	In 1770, Bengal suffered from a famine which in its effects proved one of the most terrible famines known in human history.
 


 

•	Bengal famine killed millions of people and nearly one-third of Bengal’s population fell victim to its ravages. Though the famine was due to failure of rains, but its effects were heightened by the Company’s policies.
 











•	For British, Haider Ali was one of the biggest problems in south India; without defeating Haider Ali, it was not possible for the British to control the southern states.

Haider Ali
•	In 1766, British entered into an alliance with the Nizam of Hyderabad to protect him from Haider Ali (of Mysore) in return for the secession of the Northern Sarkars.

•	Haider Ali was more than a match for the Company's armies. Having beaten back the British attack, he threatened Madras in 1769 and forced the Madras Council to sign a peace  on his terms. Both sides restored each other's conquests and promised mutual help in case of attack by a third party.

•	In 1771, when Haider Ali was attacked by the Marathas, the English went back on their promise and did not come to his help. This led Haider Ali to distrust and dislike them.
 



•	In 1775, the English clashed with the Marathas, which lasted in 1782.

•	In the English and Maratha war, all the Maratha chiefs were united behind the
Peshwa and their chief minister, Nana Phadnavis.

•	The Southern Indian powers had long been resenting the presence of the British among them, and Haider Ali and the Nizam chose this moment to declare war against the British Company.

•	The British in India were, however, led at this time by their brilliant, energetic, and experienced Governor-General, Warren Hastings.

•	Acting with firm determination, he retrieved the vanishing British power and prestige.

•	The English had found in the Marathas a determined enemy, with immense resources. Mahadji Sindhia had given evidence of his power which the English dreaded to contest.

•	The Anglo-Maratha War had come to a standout. With the intercession of Mahadji, peace was concluded in 1782 by the Treaty of Salbai by which the status quo was maintained.

•	This war, known in history as the First Anglo-Maratha War, did not end in victory for either side. But it did give the British 20 years of peace with the Marathas, the strongest Indian power of the day.

•	The British utilized the period of 20 years to consolidate their rule over the Bengal Presidency, while the Maratha chiefs frittered away their energy in bitter mutual squabbles.

•	The Treaty of Salbai enabled the British to exert pressure on Mysore as the Marathas promised to help them in recovering their territories from Haidar Ali.

•	In July 1781, the British army under Eyre Coote defeated Haider Ali at Porte Novo and saved Madras.

Tipu Sultan
•	After Haider Ali’s death in December 1782, the war was carried on by his son, Tipu Sultan. Since neither side was capable of overpowering the other, peace was signed by them in March 1784 and both sides restored all conquests.
 


 

•	The peace of 1784 had not removed the grounds for struggle between Tipu and the British; it had merely postponed the struggle.

•	The authorities of the East India Company were acutely hostile to Tipu. They looked upon him as their most formidable rival in the South and as the chief obstacle standing between them and complete domination over South India.

•	Tipu, on his part, thoroughly disliked the English, saw them as the chief danger to his own independence, and nursed the ambition to expel them from India.

•	Even though Tipu fought with exemplary bravery, Lord Cornwallis, the then Governor-General, had succeeded through shrewd diplomacy in isolating him by winning over the Marathas, the Nizam, and the rulers of Travancore and Coorg.

•	This war again revealed that the Indian powers were shortsighted enough to aid the foreigner against another Indian power for the sake of temporary advantages.

•	By the Treaty of Seringapatam (1792), Tipu ceded half of his territories to the allies and paid 330 lakhs of rupees as indemnity.

•	The Third Anglo-Mysore war destroyed Tipu's dominant position in the South and firmly established British supremacy there.
 











•	Lord Wellesley (as Governor General) came to India in 1798 at a time when the British were locked in a life and death struggle with France all over the world.

•	Lord Wellesley decided that the time was ripe for bringing as many Indian states as possible under British control.

•	By 1797, the two strongest Indian powers, Mysore and the Marathas, had declined in power.

•	The Third Anglo-Mysore war had reduced Mysore to a mere shadow of its recent greatness and the Marathas were dissipating their strength in mutual intrigues and wars.

•	Political conditions in India were propitious for a policy of (British) expansion: aggression was easy as well as profitable.

Administrative Plans of Wellesley

•	To achieve his political aims, Wellesley relied on three methods i.e.
 

o	The system of Subsidiary Alliances;

o	Outright wars; and

o	Assumptions of the territories of previously subordinated rulers.

•	The doctrine of subsidiary alliance was introduced by Lord Wellesley.

•	Under the subsidiary alliance system, the ruler of the allying Indian State was compelled to accept the permanent stationing of a British force within his territory and to pay a subsidy for its maintenance.

Subsidiary Alliance

•	In reality, by signing a Subsidiary Alliance, an India state virtually signed away:

o	Its independence;

o	The right of self-defense;

o	Maintaining the diplomatic relations;

o	Employing foreign experts; and

o	Settling its disputes with its neighbors.

•	As a consequence of Subsidiary Alliance, lakhs of soldiers and officers were deprived of their hereditary livelihood, spreading misery and degradation in the country.

•	Many of the unemployed soldiers joined the roaming bands of Pindarees which were to ravage the whole of India during the first two decades of the 19th century.

•	The Subsidiary Alliance system was, on the other hand, extremely advantageous to the British. They could now maintain a large army at the cost of the Indian states.

•	Lord Wellesley signed his first Subsidiary Treaty with the Nizam of Hyderabad in 1798.

•	The Nizam was to dismiss his French-trained troops and to maintain a subsidiary force of six battalions at a cost of £ 241,710 per year. In return, the British guaranteed his state against Maratha encroachments.
 

•	In 1800, the subsidiary force was increased and, in lieu of cash payment, the
Nizam ceded part of his territories to the Company.

•	The Nawab of Avadh was forced to sign a Subsidiary Treaty in 1801. In return for a larger subsidiary force, the Nawab was forced to surrender to the British nearly half of his kingdom consisting of Rohilkhand and the territory lying between the Rivers Ganga and the Yamuna.

•	Wellesley dealt with Mysore, Carnatic, Tanjore, and Surat even more sternly.

•	Tipu of Mysore would, of course, never agreed to a Subsidiary Treaty. On the contrary, he had never reconciled himself to the loss of half of his territory in 1791. He worked incessantly to strengthen his forces for the inevitable struggle with the British.

•	Tipu Sultan entered into negotiations for an alliance with Revolutionary France. He sent missions 'to Afghanistan, Arabia, and Turkey to forge an anti-British alliance.

•	Lord Wellesley was no less determined to bring Tipu to heel and to prevent any possibility of the French re-entering India.

•	The British army attacked and defeated Tipu in a brief but fierce war in 1799, before French help could reach him.

•	Tipu still refused to beg for peace on humiliating terms. He proudly declared that it was "better to die like a soldier, than to live a miserable dependent on the infidels, in the list of their pensioned, rajas and Nawabs."

•	Tipu met a hero's end on 4 May 1799 while defending his capital Seringapatam. His army remained loyal to him to the very end.

•	Nearly half of Tipu's dominions were divided between the British and their ally, the Nizam. The reduced kingdom of Mysore was restored to the descendants of the original rajas from whom Haidar Ali had seized power.

•	A special treaty of Subsidiary Alliance was imposed on the new Raja by which the Governor-General was authorized to take over the administration of the state in case of necessity.

•	An important result of the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War was the complete elimination of the French threat to British supremacy in India.

•	In 1801, Lord Wellesley forced a new treaty upon the puppet Nawab of Carnatic compelling him to cede his kingdom to the Company in return for a handsome pension.
 

•	The Madras Presidency as it existed till 1947 was created, by attaching the Carnatic to territories seized from Mysore and Malabar.

•	The territories of the rulers of Tanjore and Surat were taken over and their rulers pensioned off.

•	The Marathas were the only major Indian power left outside the sphere of British control. Wellesley now turned his attention towards them and began aggressive interference in their internal affairs.

Chiefs of Maratha Empire
•	The Maratha Empire (during the Wellesley time) consisted of a confederacy of five big chiefs, namely:

o	The Peshwa at Poona;

o	The Gaekwad at Baroda;

o	The Sindhia at Gwalior;

o	The Holkar at Indore; and

o	The Bhonsle at Nagpur.

•	The Peshwa was the nominal head of the confederacy.

•	Unfortunately, the Marathas lost nearly all of their wise and experienced leaders towards the close of the 18th century.

•	Mahadji Sindhia, Tukoji Holker, Ahilya Bai Holker, Peshwa Madhav Rao II, and Nana Phadnavis, the people who had kept the Maratha confederacy together for the last 30 years, all were dead by the year 1800.

•	What was worse, the Maratha chiefs were engaged in bitter fratricidal strife, blind to the real danger from the rapidly advancing foreigners.

•	Wellesley had repeatedly offered a subsidiary alliance to the Peshwa and Sindhia. But the far-sighted Nana Phadnavis had refused to fall into the trap.

•	On 25 October 1802, the day of the great festival of Diwali, Holkar defeated the combined armies of' the Peshwa and Sindhia, the cowardly Peshwa Baji Rao II rushed into the arms of the English and on the fateful last day of 1802 signed the Subsidiary Treaty at Bassein.
The following map shows the acquired British territories in 1765 and 1805.
 


 
 











•	Marquess of Hastings (Lord Hastings) was appointed Governor-General of India on November 11, 1812. His tenure in India as Governor-General was a notable one, as he won two wars namely the Gurkha War (1814–1816) and the Maratha War (1818).


•	The Second Anglo-Maratha War had shattered the power of the Maratha chiefs but not their spirit. The loss of their freedom rankled in their hearts. They made a desperate last attempt to regain their independence and old prestige in 1817.

•	The lead in organizing a united front of the Maratha chiefs was taken by the
Peshwa who was smarting under the rigid control exercised by the British
 

Resident. However, once again the Marathas failed to evolve a conceded and well-thought out plan of action.

•	The Peshwa attacked the British Residency at Poona in November 1817. Madhoji II Bhonsle (also known as Appa Sahib) of Nagpur attacked the Residency at Nagpur, and Madhav Rao Holkar made preparations for war.

•	The Governor-General, Lord Hastings, struck back with characteristic vigor.

•	Hastings compelled Sindhia to accept British suzerainty, and defeated the armies of the Peshwa, Bhonsle, and Holkar.

•	The Peshwa was dethroned and pensioned off at Bithur near Kanpur. His territories were annexed and the enlarged Presidency of Bombay brought into existence.

•	Holkar and Bhonsle accepted subsidiary forces. All the Maratha chiefs had to cede to the Company large tracts of their territories.

•	To satisfy Maratha pride, the small Kingdom of Satara was founded out of the Peshwa's lands and gave to the descendant of Chhatrapati Shivaji who ruled it as a complete dependent of the British.

•	Like other rulers of Indian states, the Maratha chiefs too existed from now on at the mercy of the British power.

•	The Rajputana states had been dominated for several decades by Sindhia and Holkar. After the downfall of the Marathas, they lacked the energy to reassert their independence and readily accepted British supremacy.

•	By 1818, the entire Indian sub-continent excepting the Punjab and Sindh had been brought under British control.
 


 
•	Some part of India was ruled directly by the British and the rest by a host of Indian rulers over whom the British exercised paramount power (as shown in the map given above).
 



•	The British protected states had virtually no armed forces of their own, nor did they have any independent foreign relations. However, they were autonomous in their internal affairs, but even in this respect, they acknowledged British authority wielded through a Resident.

•	The British protected states paid heavily for the British forces stationed in their territories to control them.
 











•	To consolidate its power, the British completed the task of conquering the whole of India from 1818 to 1857.

Conquest of Sindh
•	The conquest of Sindh occurred as a result of the growing Anglo-Russian rivalry in Europe and Asia and the consequent British fears that Russia might attack India through Afghanistan or Persia.

•	To counter Russia, the British Government decided to increase its influence in Afghanistan and Persia. It further felt that this policy could be success, fully pursued only if Sindh was brought trader British control. The commercial possibilities of the river Sindh were an additional attraction.

•	The roads and rivers of Sindh were opened to British trade by a treaty in 1832.

•	The chiefs of Sindh, known as Amirs were forced to sign a Subsidiary Treaty in 1839. And finally, in spite of previous assurances that its territorial integrity would be respected, Sindh was annexed in 1843 after a brief campaign by Sir Charles Napier.

Conquest of Punjab
•	The death of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in June 1839 was followed by political instability and rapid changes of government in the Punjab. Selfish and corrupt leaders came to the front. Ultimately, power fell into the hands of the brave and patriotic but utterly indiscipline army.

•	The political instability in Punjab led the British to look greedily across the Sutlej upon the land of the five rivers even though they had signed a treaty of perpetual friendship with Ranjit Singh in 1809.

•	The British officials increasingly talked of having to wage a campaign in the Punjab.

•	The Punjab army let itself be provoked by the warlike actions of the British and their intrigues with the corrupt chiefs of the Punjab.

•	In November 1844, Major Broadfoot, who was known to be hostile to the Sikhs, was appointed the British agent in Ludhiana.
 

•	Broadfoot repeatedly indulged in hostile actions and gave provocations. The corrupt chiefs and officials found that the army would sooner or later deprive them of their power, position, and possessions. Therefore, they conceived the idea of saving themselves by embroiling the army in a war with the British.

•	In the autumn of 1845, news reached that boats designed to form bridges had been dispatched from Bombay to Ferozepur on the Sutlej.

•	The Punjab Army, now convinced that the British were determined to occupy the Punjab, took counter measures.

•	When it heard in December that Lord Gough, the Commander-in-Chief, and Lord Harding, the Governor-General, were marching towards Ferozepur, the Punjab army decided to strike.

•	The war between the two was thus declared on 13 December 1845. The danger from the foreigner immediately united the Hindus, the Muslims, and the Sikhs.

•	The Punjab army fought heroically and with exemplary courage. But some of its leaders had already turned traitors. The Prime Minister, Raja Lal Singh, and the Commander-in-Chief, Misar Tej Singh, were secretly corresponding with the enemy.

•	The Punjab Army was forced to concede defeat and to sign the humiliating Treaty of Lahore on 8 March 1846.
 

•	The British annexed the Jalandhar Doab and handed over Jammu and Kashmir to Raja Gulab Singh Dogra for a cash payment of five million rupees.

•	The Punjab army was reduced to 20,000 infantry and 12,000 cavalries and a strong British force was stationed at Lahore.

•	Later, on 16 December 1846, another treaty was signed giving the British Resident at Lahore full authority on over all matters in every department of the state. Moreover, the British were permitted to station their troops in any part of the state.

•	In 1848, freedom loving Punjabis rose up in through numerous local revolts. Two of the prominent revolts were led by Mulraj at Multan and Chattar Singh Attariwala near Lahore.

•	The Punjabis were once again decisively defeated. Lord Dalhousie seized this opportunity to annex the Punjab. Thus, the last independent state of India was absorbed in the British Empire of India.
 











•	Lord Dalhousie came to India as the Governor-General in 1848. He was from the beginning determined to extend direct British rule over as large area as possible.

•	Dalhousie had declared that "the extinction of all native states of India is just a question of time". The ostensible reason for this policy was his belief that British administration was far superior to the corrupt and oppressive administration of the native rulers.

•	The underlying motive of Dalhousie’s policy was the expansion of British exports to India.

•	Dalhousie, in common with other aggressive imperialists, believed that British exports to the native states of India were suffering because of the maladministration of these states by their Indian rulers.

Doctrine of Lapse
•	The chief instrument through which Lord Dalhousie implemented his policy of annexation was the ‘Doctrine of Lapse.’
 

•	Under the Doctrine of Lapse, when the ruler of a protected state died without a natural heir, his/her state was not to pass to an adopted heir as sanctioned by the age-old tradition of the country. Instead, it was to be annexed to the British dominions unless the adoption had been clearly approved earlier by the British authorities.

•	Many states, including Satara in 1848 and Nagpur and Jhansi in 1854, were annexed by applying this doctrine.

•	Dalhousie also refused to recognize the titles of many ex-rulers or to pay their pensions. Thus, the titles of the Nawabs of Carnatic and of Surat and the Raja of Tanjore were extinguished.

•	After the death of the ex-Peshwa Baji Rao II, who had been made the Raja of Bithur, Dalhousie refused to extend his pay or pension to his adopted son, Nana Saheb.

•	Lord Dalhousie was keen on annexing the kingdom of Avadh. But the task presented certain difficulties. For one, the Nawabs of Avadh had been British allies since the Battle of Buxer. Moreover, they had been most obedient to the British over the years.

•	The Nawab of Avadh had many heirs and could not therefore be covered by the Doctrine of Lapse. Some other pretext had to be found for depriving him of his dominions.

•	Lord Dalhousie hit upon the idea of alleviating the plight of the people of Avadh. Nawab Wajid Ali Shah was accused of having misgoverned his state and of refusing to introduce reforms. His state was therefore annexed in 1856.

•	Undoubtedly, the degeneration of the administration of Avadh was a painful reality for its people.

•	The Nawabs of Avadh, like other princes of the day, were selfish rulers absorbed in self-indulgence who cared little for good administration for the welfare of the people. However, the responsibility for this state of affairs was in part that of the British who had at least since, 1801 controlled and indirectly governed Avadh.

•	In reality, it was the immense potential of Avadh as a market for Manchester goods which excited Dalhousie’s greed and aroused his ‘philanthropic’ feelings.

•	For similar reasons, to satisfy Britain’s growing demand for raw cotton, Dalhousie took away the cotton-producing province of Berar from the Nizam in 1853.
The following map shows the British territory in 1856
 


 
 











•	The administrative policy of the Company underwent frequent changes during the long period between 1751 and 1857. However, it never lost sight of its main objects which were:

o	To increase the Company's profits;

o	To enhance the profitability of its Indian possessions to Britain; and

o	To maintain and strengthen the British hold over India.

•	The administrative machinery of the Government of India was designed and developed to serve these ends. The main emphasis in this respect was placed on the maintenance of law and order so that trade with India and exploitation of its resources could be carried out without disturbance.

The Structure of the Government
•	From 1765 to 1772, in the period of the Dual Government, Indian officials were allowed to function as before but under the over-all control of the British Governor and British officials.

•	The Indian officials had responsibility but no power while the Company's officials had power but no responsibility. Both sets of officials were venal and corrupt men.

•	In 1772, the Company ended the Dual Government and undertook to administer Bengal directly through its own servants. But the evils inherent in the administration of a country by a purely commercial company soon came to the surface.

•	The East India Company was at this time a commercial body designed to trade with the East. Moreover, its higher authority was situated in England, many thousands of miles away from India.

•	The parliamentary politics of Britain during the latter half of the 18th century were corrupt in the extreme.

•	The Company, as well as its retired officials bought seats in the House of Commons for their agents.

•	Many English statesmen were worried that the Company and its officials, backed by Indian plunder, might gain a preponderant influence in the
 

Government of Britain. The Company and its vast empire in India had to be controlled or the Company as master of India would soon come to control British administration and be in a position to destroy the liberties of the British people.

•	The exclusive privileges of the Company were also attacked by the rising school of economists representing free-trade manufacturing capitalism. In his celebrated work, “The Wealth of Nations.”

•	Adam Smith, the founder of Classical economics, condemned the exclusive companies; “Such exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in many respect; always more or less inconvenient to the countries in which they are established and destructive to those which have the misfortune to fall under their government.”

The Regulating Act of 1773
•	The first important parliamentary act regarding the Company's affairs was the
Regulating Act of 1773.

•	Act of 1773 made changes in the constitution of the Court of Directors of the Company and subjected their actions to the supervision of the British Government.

•	The Directors were to lay before the Ministry all correspondence dealing with the civil and military affairs and the revenues of India.

•	In India, the Government of Bengal was to be carried on by a Governor-General and his Council who were given the power to superintend and control the Bombay and Madras Presidencies in matters of war and peace.

•	The Act also provided for the establishment of a Supreme Court of Justice at Calcutta to administer justice to Europeans, their employees, and the citizens of Calcutta.

•	The Regulating Act soon broke down in practice. It had not given the British Government effective and decisive control over the Company.

•	In India, the Act had paced the Governor-General at the mercy of his Council. Three of the Councilors could combine and outvote the Governor-General on any matter.

•	In practice, Warren Hastings, the first Governor-General under the Act, and three of his Councilors quarreled incessantly, often creating deadlocks in the administration.
 

•	The Act perceptively had failed to resolve the conflict between the Company and its opponents in England who were daily growing stronger and more vocal. Moreover, the Company remained extremely vulnerable to the attacks of its enemies as the administration of its Indian possessions continued to be corrupt, oppressive, and economically disastrous.

Pitt’s India Act
•	The defects of the Regulating Act and the exigencies of British politics necessitated the passing in 1784 of another important act known as Pitt's India Act.

•	Pitt’s Act gave the British Government supreme control over the Company's affairs and its administration in India. It established six Commissioners for the affairs of India, popularly known as the Board of Control, including two Cabinet Ministers.

•	The Board of Control was to guide and control the work of the Court of Directors and the Government of India. In important and urgent matters it had the power to send direct orders to India through a secret committee of Directors.

•	The Pitt’s Act placed the Government of India in the hands of the Governor- General and a Council of three, so that if the Governor-General could get the support of even one member, he could have his way.

•	The Act clearly subordinated the Bombay and Madras Presidencies to Bengal in all questions of war, diplomacy, and revenues.

•	With the Pitt’s Act, a new phase of the British conquest began in India. While the East India Company became the instrument of British national policy, India was to be made to serve the interests of all sections of the ruling classes of Britain.

•	The Company having saved its monopoly of the Indian and Chinese trade was satisfied. Its Directors retained the profitable right of appointing and dismissing its British officials in India. Moreover, the Government of India was to be carried out through their agency.

•	While Pitt's India Act laid down the general framework in which the Government of India was to be carried on till 1857, later enactments brought about several important changes which gradually diminished the powers and privileges of the Company.

•	In 1786, the Governor-General was given the authority to overrule his Council in matters of importance affecting safety, peace, or the interests of the Empire in India.
 

Charter Act of 1813
•	By the Charter Act of 1813, the trade monopoly of the Company in India was ended and trade with India was thrown open to all British subjects. But the trade of tea and trade with China were still exclusive to the Company.

•	According to the Charter Act, the Government and the revenues of India continued to be in the hands of the Company. The Company also continued to appoint its officials in India.

Charter Act of 1833
•	The Charter Act of 1833 brought the Company's monopoly of tea trade and trade with China to an end. At the same time, the debts of the Company were taken over by the Government of India, which was also to pay its shareholders a 10.5 per cent dividend on their capital.

•	The Government of India continued to be run by the Company under the strict control of the Board of Control.

•	Supreme authority in India was, therefore, delegated to the Governor-General in Council. The Governor-General, having the authority to overrule his Council in important questions, became in fact the real, effective ruler of India, functioning under the superintendence, control, and direction of the British Government.

•	As per the Act of 1833, Indians were allowed ‘no share’ in their own administration.

•	The three seats of authority, as far as India was concerned, were:

o	The Court of Directors of the Company;

o	The Board of Control representing the British Government; and

o	The Governor-General.

•	With none of these three seats, any Indian was associated even remotely or in any capacity.

•	The British created a new system of administration in India to serve their purposes.

•	The chief aim of the British was to enable them to exploit India economically to the maximum advantage of various British interests, ranging from the Company to the Lancashire manufacturers.
 

•	At the same time, India was to be made to bear the full cost of its own conquest as well as of the foreign rule. An examination of the economic policies of the British in India is, therefore, of prime importance.
 











•	From 1600 to 1757, the East India Company’s role in India, was that of a trading corporation, which brought goods or precious metals into India and exchanged them for Indian goods like textiles, spices, etc., which it sold abroad.

•	British’s profits came primarily from the sale of Indian goods abroad. It tried constantly to open new markets for Indian goods in Britain and other countries. Thereby, it increased the export of Indian manufactures and thus encouraged their production. This is the reason why the Indian rulers tolerated and even encouraged the establishment of the Company's factories in India.

•	By 1720, laws had been passed forbidding the wear or use of printed or dyed cotton cloth in the UK.

•	Other European countries, except Holland, also either prohibited the import of Indian cloth or imposed heavy import duties. In spite of these laws, however, Indian silk and cotton textiles still held their importance in foreign markets, until the middle of the 18th century when the English textile industry began to develop on the basis of new and advance technology.

•	After the Battle of Plassey in 1757, the pattern of the Company's commercial relations with India underwent a qualitative change. Now the Company could use its political control over Bengal to push its Indian trade.

•	The Company used its political power to dictate terms to the weavers of Bengal who were forced to sell their products at a cheaper and dictated price, even at a loss. Moreover, their labor was no longer free. Many of them were compelled to work for the Company for low wages and were forbidden to work for Indian merchants.

•	The British Company eliminated its rival traders, both Indian and foreign, and prevented them from offering higher wages or pries to the Bengal handicraftsmen.

•	The servants of the Company monopolized the sale of raw cotton and made the Bengal weaver pay exorbitant prices for it. Thus, the weaver lost by both ways, as a buyer as well as a seller. On the contrary, Indian textiles had to pay heavy duties on catering England.
 

The Industrial Revolution (in Britain)
•	The real blow on Indian handicrafts fell after 1813 when they lost not only their foreign markets but, what was of much greater importance, their market in India itself.

•	Between the second half of the 18th century and the first few decades of the 19th century, Britain underwent profound social and economic transformation. British industry developed and expanded rapidly on the basis of modem machines, the factory system, and capitalism.

•	The Industrial Revolution transformed British society in a fundamental manner. It led to rapid economic development, which is the foundation of today's high standard of living in Britain as well as in Europe, the Soviet Union, the U.S.A., Canada, Australia, and Japan.

•	Britain became increasingly urbanized as a result of the Industrial Revolution. More and more men began to live in factory towns.

•	In 1750, Britain had only two cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants; in 1851, their number was 29.

•	Two entirely new classes of society were born i.e.

o	The industrial capitalists, who owned the factories, and

o	The workers who hired out as the labors on daily wages.
 



•	While the industrial capitalist class developed rapidly, enjoying unprecedented prosperity, the workers — the laboring poor in the beginning reaped a harvest of sorrow.

•	Instead of exporting manufactured goods, India was now forced to export raw materials like raw cotton and raw silk, which British industries needed urgently, or plantation products like indigo and tea, or food grains, which were in short supply in Britain.

•	The British also promoted the sale of Indian opium in China even though the Chinese put a ban on it because of its poisonous and other harmful qualities. But the trade yielded large profits to British merchants and fat revenues to the Company-cannoned administration of India.

•	Interestingly enough, the import of opium into Britain was strictly banned. Thus, the commercial policy of the East India Company after 1913 was guided by the needs of British industry. Its main aim was to transform India into a consumer of British manufactures and a supplier of raw materials.

The Drain of Wealth
•	The British exported to Britain part of India's wealth and resources for which India got no adequate economic or material return.

•	This 'Economic Drain' was peculiar to British rule. Even the worst of previous Indian governments had spent the revenue they extracted from the people inside the country.

•	The British, consequently, spent a large part of the taxes and income they derived from Indian people not in India, but in their home country.

•	The drain of wealth from Bengal began in 1757 when the Company's servants began to carry home immense fortunes extorted from Indian rulers, zamindars, merchants, and from other common people.

•	They sent home nearly £ 6 million between 1758 and 1765. This amount was more than four times the total land revenue collection of the Nawab of Bengal in 1765.

•	In 1765, the Company acquired the dewani of Bengal and thus gained control over its revenues.

•	The Company, even more than its servants, soon directly organized the drain. It began to purchase Indian goods out of the revenue of Bengal and to export them. These purchases were known as 'investments' Thus, through 'Investments', Bengal's revenue was sent to England.
 











•	Up to the middle of the 19th century, the means of transport in India were backward. They were confined to bullock-cart, camel, and packhorse.

•	The British rulers soon realized that a cheap and easy system of transport was a necessity if British manufactures were to flow into India on a large scale and her raw materials secured for British industries.

•	The British rulers introduced steamships on the rivers and set about improving the roads.

•	Work on the Grand Trunk Road from Calcutta to Delhi began in 1839 and completed in the 1850's. Efforts were also made to link by road the major cities, ports, and markets of the country.

Development of Railway
•	The first railway engine designed by George Stephenson was put on the rail in England in 1814. Railways developed rapidly during the 1830s and 1840s.

•	The earliest suggestion to build a railway in India was made in Madras in 1831. But the wagons of this railway were to be drawn by horses.

•	Construction of steam-driven railways in India was first proposed in 1834 in England. It was given strong political support by England's railway promoters, financiers, and mercantile houses trading with India, and textile manufacturers.

•	It was decided that the Indian railways were to be constructed and operated by private companies who were guaranteed a minimum of five per cent return on their capital by the Government of India.

•	The first railway line running from Bombay to Thane was opened to traffic in
1853.
 


 
•	Lord Dalhousie, who became Governor-General of India in 1849, was an ardent advocate of rapid railway construction.

•	Dalhousie proposed a network of four main trunk lines which would link the interior of the country with the big ports and inter-connect the different parts of the country.

•	By the end of 1869, more than 4,000 miles of railways had been built by the guaranteed companies; but this system proved very costly and slow, and so in 1869 the Government of India decided to build new railways as state enterprises. But the speed of railway extension still did not satisfy officials in India and businessmen in Britain.

•	After 1880, railways were built through private enterprises as well as state agency.

•	By 1905, nearly 28,000 miles of railways had been built. The railway lines were laid primarily with a view to link India's raw material producing areas in the interior with the ports of export.

•	The needs of Indian industries regarding their markets and their sources of raw materials were neglected. Moreover, the railway rates were fixed in a manner so as to favor imports and exports and to discriminate against internal movement of goods.

•	Several railway lines in Burma and North-Western India were built at high cost to serve British imperial interests.
 

Postal & Telegraph System
•	The British also established an efficient and modern postal system and introduced the telegraph.

•	The first telegraph line from Calcutta to Agra was opened in 1853.

•	Lord Dalhousie introduced postage stamps. Previously cash payment had to be made when a letter was posted. He also cut down postal rates and charged a uniform rates.
 











•	The Indian peasants had been forced to bear, the main burden of providing money for the trade and profits of the Company, the cost of administration, and the wars of British expansion in India. In fact, the British could not have conquered such a vast country as India if they had not taxed him heavily.

•	The Indian state had since times immemorial taken a part of the agriculture produce as land revenue. It had been done so either directly through its servants or indirectly through intermediaries, such as zamindars, revenue- farmers, etc., who collected the land revenue from the cultivator and kept a part of it as their commission.

•	The intermediaries were primarily collectors of land revenue, although they did sometimes own some land in the area from which they collected revenue.

•	The Land Revenue Policy in India can studied into three following heads:



















The Permanent Settlement
•	In 1773, the British Company decided to manage the land revenues directly.

•	Warren Hastings auctioned the right to collect revenue to the highest bidders. But his experiment did not succeed.
 

•	The amount of land revenue was pushed high by zamindars and other Speculators bidding against each other; however, the actual collection varied from year to year and seldom came up to official expectations. This introduced instability in the Company's revenues at a time when the Company was hard pressed for money.

•	Neither the ryot nor the zamindar would do anything to improve cultivation when they did not know what the next year's assessment would be or who would be the next year's revenue collector.

•	The idea of fixing the land revenue at a permanent amount was introduced. Finally, after prolonged discussion and debate, the Permanent Settlement was introduced in Bengal and Bihar in 1793 by Lord Cornwallis.

•	Permanent Settlement had some special features i.e.

o	The reminders and revenue collectors were converted into so many landlords. They were not only to act as agents of the Government in collecting land revenue from the ryot, but also to become the owners of the entire land (over which they were collecting revenue). Their right of ownership was made hereditary and transferable.

o	On the other hand, the cultivators were reduced to the low status of mere tenants and were deprived of long-standing rights to the soil and other customary rights.

o	The use of the pasture and forest lands, irrigation canals, fisheries, and homestead plots and protection against enhancement of rent were some of the cultivators’ rights which were sacrificed.

o	In fact the tenancy of Bengal was left entirely at the mercy of the zamindars. This was done so that the zamindars might be able to pay in time the exorbitant land revenue demand of the Company.

o	The zamindars were to give 10/11th of the rental they derived from the - peasantry to the state, keeping only 1/11th for themselves. But the sums to be paid by them as land revenue were fixed in perpetuity.

o	At the same time, the zamindar had to pay his revenue rigidly on the due date even if the crop had failed for some reason; otherwise his lands were to be sold.

o	John Shore, the man who planned the Permanent Settlement and later succeeded Cornwallis as Governor-General, calculated that if the gross produce of Bengal be taken as 100, the Government claimed 45, zamindars and other intermediaries below them received 15, and only 40 remained with the actual cultivator.
 

Benefits of Permanent Settlement
•	Before 1793, the Company was troubled by fluctuations in its chief source of income, i.e. the land revenue. The Permanent Settlement guaranteed the stability of income.

•	The Permanent Settlement enabled the Company to maximize its income as land revenue was now fixed higher than it had ever been in the past.

•	Collection of revenue through a small number of zamindars seemed to be much simpler and cheaper than the process of dealing with lakhs of cultivators.

•	The Permanent Settlement was expected to increase agricultural production.

•	Since the land revenue would not be increased in future even if the zamindar's income went up, the latter would be inspired to extend cultivation and improve agricultural productivity.

Ryotwari Settlement
•	The establishment of British rule in South and South-Western India brought new problems of land settlement. The officials believed that in these regions there were no zamindars with large estates with whom settlement of land revenue could be made and that the introduction of zamindari system would upset the existing state of affairs.

•	Many Madras officials led by Reed and Munro recommended that settlement should therefore be made directly with the actual cultivators.

•	The system they proposed, is known as the Ryotwari Settlement, under which the cultivator was to be recognized as the owner of his plot of land subject to the payment of land revenue.

•	The supporters of the Ryotwari Settlement claimed that it was a continuation of the state of affairs that had existed in the past.

•	Munro said: "It is the system which has always prevailed in India".

•	The Ryotwari Settlement was introduced in parts of the Madras and Bombay Presidencies in the beginning of the 19th century.

•	The settlement under the Ryotwari system was not made permanent. It was revised periodically after 20 to 30 years when the revenue demand was usually raised.
 

Mahalwari System
•	A modified version of the zamindari settlement, introduced in the Gangetic valley, the North-West Provinces, parts of Central India, and Punjab, was known as the Mahalwari System.

•	The revenue settlement was to be made village by village or estate (mahal) by estate with landlords or heads of families who collectively claimed to be the landlords of the village or the estate.

•	In Punjab, a modified Mahalwari System known as the village system was introduced. In Mahalwari areas also, the land revenue was periodically revised.

•	Both the Zamindari and the Ryotwari systems, departed fundamentally from the traditional land systems of the country.

•	The British created a new form of private property in land in such a way that the benefit of the innovation did not go to the cultivators.

•	All over the country, the land was now made salable, mortgagable, and alienable. This was done primarily to protect the Government's revenue.

•	If land had not been made transferable or salable, the Government would find it very difficult to realize revenue from a cultivator who had no savings or possessions out of which to pay it.

•	The British by making land a commodity which could be freely bought and sold introduced a fundamental change in the existing land systems of the country. The stability and the continuity of the Indian villages were shaken, in fact, the entire structure of the rural society began to break up.
 











•	In the beginning, the Company left the administration of its possessions in India in Indian hands, confining its activities to supervision. But soon found
`that British aims were not adequately served by following old methods of administration. Consequently, the Company took all aspects of administration in its own hand.

•	Under Warren Hastings and Cornwallis, the administration of Bengal was completely overhauled and found a new system based on the English pattern.

•	The spread of British power to new areas, new problems, new needs, new experiences, and new ideas led to changes in the system of administration. But the overall objectives of imperialism were never forgotten.

Strength of British Administrative System
•	The British administration in India was based on three pillars:

a.	The Civil Service,

b.	The Army, and

c.	The Police.

•	The chief aim of British-Indian administration was the maintenance of law and order and the perpetuation of British rule. Without law and order, British merchants and British manufacturers could not hope to sell their goods in every nook and corner of India.

•	The British, being foreigners, could not hope to win the affections of the Indian people; they, therefore, relied on superior force rather than on public support for the maintenance of their control over India.

Civil Service
•	The Civil Service was brought into existence by Lord Cornwallis.
 


 

•	The East India Company had from the beginning carried on its trade in the East through servants who were paid low wages but who were permitted to trade privately.

•	Later, when the Company became a territorial power, the same servants assumed administrative functions. They now became extremely corrupt by:

o	Oppressing local weavers and artisans, merchants, and zamindars,

o	Extorting bribes and 'gifts' from rajas and nawabs, and

o	Indulging in illegal private trade. They amassed untold wealth with which they retired to England.

•	Clive and Warren Hastings made attempts to put an end to their corruption, but were only partially successful.

•	Cornwallis, who came to India as Governor-General in 1786, was determined to purify the administration, but he realized that the Company's servants would not give honest and efficient service so long as they were not given adequate salaries.

•	Cornwallis, therefore, enforced the rules against private trade and acceptance of presents and bribes by officials with strictness. At the same time, he raised the salaries of the Company's servants. For example, the Collector of a district was to be paid Rs 1,500 a month and one per cent commission on the revenue collection of his district.
 

•	Cornwallis also laid down that promotion in the Civil Service would be by seniority so that its members would remain independent of outside influence.

•	In 1800, Lord Wellesley pointed out that even though civil servants often ruled over vast areas, they came to India at the immature age of 18 or so and were given no regular training before starting on their jobs. They generally lacked knowledge of Indian languages.

•	Wellesley, therefore, established the College of Fort William at Calcutta for the education of young recruits to the Civil Service.

•	The Directors of the Company disapproved of his action and in 1806 replaced it by their own East Indian College at Haileybury in England.

•	Till 1853, all appointments to the Civil Service were made by the Directors of the East India Company who placated the members of the Board of Control by letting them make some of the nominations.

•	The Directors fought hard to retain this lucrative and prized privilege and refused to surrender it even when their other economic and political privileges were taken away by Parliament.

•	The Directors lost it finally in 1853 when the Charter Act decreed that all recruits to the Civil Service were to be selected through a competitive examination.

•	A special feature of the Indian Civil Service since the days of Cornwallis was the rigid and complete exclusion of Indians (from it).

•	It was laid down officially in 1793 that all the higher posts in administration worth more than £ 500 a year in salary were to be held by Englishmen. This policy was also applied to other branches of Government, such as the army, police, judiciary, and engineering.

•	The Indian Civil Service gradually developed as one of the most efficient and powerful civil services in the world.

•	Its members exercised vast power and often participated in the making of policy. They developed certain traditions of independence, integrity, and hard work, though these qualities obviously served British and not Indian interests.

•	Satyendranath Tagore was the first Indian who passed the Indian Civil Service examination in 1863 and hold 4th Rank. He was an author, linguist, song composer. He made significant contribution towards the emancipation of women in Indian society during the British Rule.
 


 

Army
•	The army of the British regime in India was fulfilled three important functions:

a.	It was the instrument through which the Indian powers were conquered;

b.	It defended the British Empire in India from foreign rivals; and

c.	It safeguarded British supremacy from the ever-present threat of internal revolt.

•	The bulk of the Company's army consisted of Indian soldiers, recruited chiefly from the area at present included in U.P. and Bihar.

•	For instance, in 1857, the strength of the army in India was 311,400 of whom 265,903 were Indians. Its officers were, however, exclusively British, at least since the days of Cornwallis.

•	In 1856, only three Indians in the army received a salary of Rs. 300 per month and the highest Indian officer was a subedar.

•	A large number of Indian troops had to be employed as the British troops were too expensive. Moreover, the population of Britain was perhaps too small to provide the large number of soldiers needed for the conquest of India.
 


 

•	As a counterweight, the army was officered entirely by British officials and a certain number of British troops were maintained to keep the Indian soldiers under control.

Police
•	Cornwallis had created the police system, which was one of the most popular strengths for the British rule.

•	Cornwallis relieved the zamindars of their police functions and established a regular police force to maintain law and order.

•	Interestingly, this put India ahead of Britain where a system of police had not developed yet.

•	Cornwallis established a system of circles or thanas headed by a daroga, who was an Indian. Later, the post of the District Superintendent of Police was mated to head the police organization in a district.

•	Once again, Indians were excluded from all superior posts. In the villages the duties of the police continued to he performed by village-watchmen who were maintained by the villagers.

•	The police gradually succeeded in reducing major crimes such as dacoity.
 



•	One of its major achievements was the suppression of thugs who robbed and killed travelers on the highways, particularly in Central India.

•	The police also prevented the organization of a large-scale conspiracy against foreign control, and when the national movement arose, the police were used to suppress it.
 











•	The British laid the foundations of a new system of dispensing justice through a hierarchy of civil and criminal courts.

•	Though given a start by Warren Hastings, the system was stabilized by Cornwallis in 1793.

•	In each district was established a Diwani Adalat, or civil court, presided over by the District Judge who belonged to the Civil Service.

•	Cornwallis thus separated the posts of the Civil Judge and the Collector.

•	Appeal from the District Court lay first to four Provincial Courts of Civil Appeal and then, finally, to the Sadar Diwani Adalat.

•	Below the District Court were Registrars' Courts, headed by Europeans, and a number of subordinate courts headed by Indian judges known as Munsifs and Amins.

•	To deal with criminal cases, Cornwallis divided the Presidency of Bengal into four Divisions, in each of which a Court of Circuit presided over by the civil servants was established.

•	The civil courts applied the customary law that had prevailed in any area or among a section of the people since times immemorial.

•	In 1831, William Bentinck abolished the Provincial Courts of Appeal and Circuit. Their work was assigned first to Commissions and later to District Judges and District Collectors.

•	Bentinck also raised the status and powers of Indians in the judicial service and appointed them as Deputy Magistrates, Subordinate Judges, and Principal Sadar Amins.

•	In 1865, High Courts were established at Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay to replace the Sadar Courts of District and Nizamat.

•	The British also established a new system of laws through the processes of enactment and codification of old laws.

•	The traditional system of justice in India had been largely based on customary law which arose from the long tradition and practice.
 

•	Though many laws were based on the shastras and shariat as well as on imperial authority. However, the British gradually evolved a new system of laws.

•	British introduced regulations, codified the existing laws, and often systematized and modernized them through judicial interpretation.

•	The Charter Act of 1833 conferred all law making power on the Governor- General-in-Council.

•	In 1833, the Government appointed a Law Commission headed by Lord Macaulay to codify Indian laws.

 

•	Macaulay’s work eventually resulted in the Indian Penal Code, the Western- derived Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure and other codes of laws.

•	The same Laws now prevailed all over the country and they were enforced by a uniform system of courts.

The Rule of Law
•	The British introduced the modern concept of the ‘rule of law.’ This meant that their administration was to he carried out, at least in theory, in obedience to laws, which clearly defined the rights, privileges, and obligations of the subjects and not according to the caprice or personal discretion of the ruler.

•	In practice, of course, the bureaucracy and the police enjoyed arbitrary powers and interfered with the rights and liberties of the people.

•	The rule of law was to some extent a guarantee of the personal liberty of a person.

•	One important feature of the 'concept of the rule of law’ was that any official could be brought before a court of law for breaches of official duty or for acts done in excess of his official authority.

Equality Before Law
•	The Indian legal system under the British was based on the concept of equality before law. This meant that in the eyes of law ‘all men were equal.’

•	The same law applied to all persons irrespective of their age, religion, or class.

•	Previously, the judicial system had paid heed to caste distinctions and had differentiated between the so-called high-born and low-born.

•	For the same crime lighter punishment was awarded to a Brahmin than to a non-Brahmin. Similarly, in practice zamindars and nobles were not judged as harshly as the common people. In fact, very often they could not be brought to justice at all for their actions.

•	There was, however, one exception to this excellent principle of equality before law. The Europeans and their descendants had separate courts and even laws.

•	In criminal cases, Europeans could be tried only by European judges.

•	Many English officials, military officers, planters, and merchants behaved with Indians in a haughty, harsh, and even brutal manner. When efforts were made to bring them to justice, they were given indirect and undue protection and consequently light or no punishment by many of the European judges before
 

whom alone they could be tried. Consequently, miscarriage of justice occurred (frequently).

•	In practice, another type of legal inequality emerged; justice became quite expensive as court fees had to be paid, lawyers engaged and the expenses of witnesses met. Courts were often situated in distant towns. Law suits dragged on for years.

•	The complicated laws were beyond the grasp of the illiterate and ignorant peasants.

•	Invariably, the rich could turn and twist the laws and courts to operate in their own favor. The mere threat to take a poor person through the long process of justice from the lower court to the highest court of appeal and thus to face harm with complete ruin often sufficed to bring him to heel.

•	The widespread prevalence of corruption in the ranks of the police and the rest of the administrative machinery led to the denial of justice. Officials often favored the rich.

•	In contrast, the system of justice that had prevailed pre-British times, was comparatively informal, speedy, and inexpensive.
 












•	Till 1813, the British also followed a policy of non-interference in the religious, social, and cultural life of the country, but after 1813, they took active steps to transform Indian society and culture.

•	Science and technology also opened new vistas of human progress.

•	The 18th and 19th centuries witnessed a great ferment of new ideas in Britain and Europe, which influenced the British outlook towards the Indian problems.

•	Modernization of India was accepted by many English officials, businessmen, and statesmen because it was expected to make Indians better customers of British goods and reconcile them to the alien rule.

•	The basic dilemma before the British administrators in India was that while British interests in India could not be served without some modernization, full modernization would generate forces, which would go against their interests and would, in the long run, endanger British supremacy in the country.

•	They had, therefore, to follow a delicately balanced policy of partial modernization that is a policy of introducing modernization in some respects and blocking and preventing it in other respects.

•	The policy of modernizing Indian society and culture was also encouraged by the Christian missionaries and religious-minded persons such as William Wilberforce and Charles Grant, the Chairman of the Court of Directors of the east India Company, who wanted to spread Christianity in India.

•	Christian missionaries supported a program of Westernization in the hope that it would eventually lead to the country’s conversion to Christianity. They, therefore, opened modern schools, colleges, and hospitals in the country.

•	As a matter of fact, the policy of modernization was gradually abandoned after 1858 as Indians proved apt pupils, shifted rapidly towards modernization of their society and assertion of their culture, and demanded to be ruled in accordance with the modern principles of liberty, equality, and nationality.

•	Lord Bentinck deserves praise for having acted resolutely in outlawing a practice of Sati, which had taken a toll of 800 lives in Bengal alone between 1815 and 1818.
 

•	Regulations prohibiting infanticide had been passed in 1795 and 1802, but they were sternly enforced only by Bentinck and Harding.

•	Harding also suppressed the practice of making human sacrifices that had prevailed among the primitive tribe of Gonds.

•	In 1856, the Government of India passed an Act enabling Hindu widows to remarry.

Spread of Modern Education
•	In 1781, Warren Hastings set up the Calcutta Madrasah for the study and teaching of Muslim law and related subjects.

•	In 1791, Jonathan Duncan started a Sanskrit College at Varanasi, where he was the Resident, for the study of Hindu Law and Philosophy.

•	Missionaries and their supporters and many humanitarians soon began to exert pressure on the Company to encourage and promote modern secular westernized education in India.

•	Lord Macaulay, who was the Law Member of the Governor-General’s Council, argued in a famous minute that Indian languages were not sufficiently developed to serve the purpose, and that “Oriental learning was completely inferior to European learning”.

•	Raja Ram Mohan Roy fervently advocated the study of Western knowledge, which was seen by them as “the Key to the treasures of scientific and democratic thought of the modern West.”

•	Education and modern ideas were thus supposed to filter or radiate downwards from the upper classes.

•	The State’s Educational Dispatch of 1854 (by Charles Wood) was another important step in the development of education in India.
 


 
•	The Dispatch asked the Government of India to assume responsibility for the education of the masses. It thus repudiated the “downward filtration” theory, at last on paper.

•	As a result of the directions given by the Dispatch, Departments of Education were instituted in all provinces and affiliating Universities were set up in 1857 at Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras.

•	Bankim Chandra Chatterjee, the famous Bengali novelist, became in 1858 one of the first two graduates of Calcutta University.

•	Western education was expected to reconcile the people of India to British rule particularly as it glorified the British conquerors of India and their administration. Thus the British wanted to use modern education to strengthen the foundation of their political authority in the country.

•	The traditional Indian system of education gradually withered away for lack of official support and even more because of the official announcement in 1844 that applicants for government employment should possess knowledge of
 

English. Thus declaration made English-medium schools very popular and compelled more and more students to abandon the traditional schools.

Weakness of Educational System
•	A major weakness of the educational system was the neglect of mass education with the result that mass literacy in India was hardly better in 1921 than in 1821.

•	As many as 94 percent of Indians were illiterate in 1911 and 92 percent in 1921.

•	The emphasis on English as the medium of instruction in place of the Indian language also prevented the spread of education to the masses.

•	The costly nature of higher education tended to make it a monopoly of the richer classes and the city-dwellers.

•	A major lacuna in the early educational policy was the almost total neglect of the education of girls for which no funds were allotted. It was because female education lacked immediate usefulness in the eyes of the foreign officials (because women could not be employed as clerks in the Government offices).

•	The Company’s administration also neglected scientific and technical education.

•	By 1857, there were only three medical colleges in the country at Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras.

•	There was only one good Engineering College at Roorkee to impart higher technical education and even this was open only to Europeans and Eurasians.
 











•	Western conquest exposed the weakness and decay of Indian society. Hence, thoughtful Indians began to look for the defects of their society and for the ways and means of removing them.

Raja Ram Mohan Roy
•	The central figure in the awakening was Ram Mohan Roy, who is rightly regarded as the first great leader of modern India.


•	Ram Mohan Roy was pained by the stagnation and corruption of the contemporary Indian society, which was at that time dominated by caste and
 

convention. Popular religion was full of superstitions and was exploited by ignorant and corrupt priests.

•	The upper classes were selfish and often sacrificed social interest to their own narrow interests.

•	Ram Mohan Roy possessed great love and respect for the traditional philosophic systems of the East; but, at the same time, he believed that Western culture alone would help to regenerate Indian society.

•	In particular, Ram Mohan Roy wanted his countrymen to accept the rational and scientific approach and the principle of human dignity and social equality of all men and women. He was also in favor of the introduction of modern capitalism and industry in the country.

•	Ram Mohan Roy represented a synthesis of the thought of East and West. He was a learned scholar who knew more than dozen languages including Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic, English, French, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.

•	As a young man, Ram Mohan Roy had studied Sanskrit literature and Hindu philosophy at Varanasi and Koran and Persian and Arabic literature at Patna.

•	Ram Mohan Roy was also well-acquainted with Jainism and other religious movements and sects of India.

•	Ram Mohan Roy made an intensive study of Western thought and culture. Only to study the Bible in the original form, he learnt Greek and Hebrew.

•	In 1809, Ram Mohan Roy wrote his famous work Gift to Monotheists in Persian. In this work, he put forward weighty arguments against belief in many gods and for the worship of a single God.

•	Ram Mohan Roay settled in Calcutta in 1814 and soon attracted a band of young men with whose cooperation he started the Atmiya Sabha.

•	In particular, Ram Mohan Roy vigorously opposed worship of idols, rigidity of caste, and prevalence of meaningless religious rituals. He condemned the priestly class for encouraging and inculcating these practices.

•	Roay held that all the principal ancient texts of the Hindus preached monotheism or worship of one God.

•	Roy published the Bengali translation of the Vedas and of five of the principal Upanishads to prove his point. He also wrote a series of tracts and pamphlets in defence of monotheism.
 

•	In 1820, Roy published his Precepts of Jesus in which he tried to separate the moral and philosophic message of the New Testament, which ho praised, from its miracle stories.

•	Roy wanted the high-moral message of Christ to be incorporated in Hinduism. This earned for him the hostility of the missionaries.

•	Roy vigorously defended Hindu religion and philosophy from the ignorant attacks of the missionaries. At the same time, he adopted an extremely friendly attitude towards other religions.

•	Roy believed that basically all religions preach a common message and that their followers are all brothers under the skin.

•	In 1829, Roy founded a new religious society, the Brahma Sabha, later known as the Brahmo Samaj, whose purpose was to purify Hinduism and to preach theism or the worship of one God. The new society was to be based on the twin pillars of reason and the Vedas and Upanishads.

•	The Brahmo Samaj laid emphasis on human dignity, opposed idolatry, and criticized such social evils as the practice of Sati.

•	Ram Mohan Roy was one of the earliest propagators of modem education, which he looked upon as a major instrument for the spread of modern ideas in the country.

•	In 1817, David Hare, who had come to India in 1800 as a watchmaker, but who spent his entire life in the promotion of modern education in the country, founded the famous Hindu College.

•	Ram Mohan Roy gave most enthusiastic assistance to Hare in his educational projects.

•	Roy maintained at his own cost an English school in Calcutta from 1817 in which, among other subjects, mechanics and the philosophy of Voltaire were taught.

•	In 1825, Roy established a Vadanta College in which courses both in Indian learning and in Western social and physical sciences were offered.

•	Ram Mohan Roy represented the first glimmerings of the rise of national consciousness in India.

•	In particular, Roy opposed the rigidities of the caste system, which he declared, “has been the source of want of unity among us.” He believed that the caste system was double evil: it created inequality and it divided people and deprived them of patriotic feeling.”
 



•	Ram Mohan Roy was pioneer of Indian journalism. He brought out journals in Bengali, Persian, Hindi, and English to spread scientific literary, and political knowledge among the people, to educate public opinion on topics of current interest, and to represent popular demands and grievances before the Government.

•	Roy was also the initiator of public agitation on political questions in the country.

•	Roy condemned the oppressive practices of the Bengal Zamindars, which had reduced the peasants to a miserable condition.

•	Roy demanded that the maximum rents paid by the actual cultivators of land should be permanently fixed so that they too would enjoy the benefits of the Permanent Settlement of 1793.

•	Roy also protested against the attempts to impose taxes on tax-free lands.

•	Roy demanded the abolition of the Company’s trading rights and the removal of heavy export duties on Indian goods.

•	Roy raised the demands for the Indianization of the superior services, separation of the executive and the judiciary, trial by jury, and judicial equality between Indians and Europeans.

•	Ram Mohan Roy took a keen interest in international events and everywhere he supported the cause of liberty, democracy, and nationalism and opposed injustice, oppression, and tyranny in every form.

•	Roy condemned the miserable condition of Ireland under the oppressive regime of absentee landlordism. He publicly declared that he would emigrate from the British Empire if Parliament failed to pass the Reform Bill.

Henry Vivian Derozio
•	A radical trend arose among the Bengali intellectuals during the late 1820s and the 1830s. This trend was more modern than Roy’s ideology and is known as the “Young Bengal Movement.”

•	The leader and inspirer of Young Bengal Movement was the young Anglo-Indian Henry Vivian Derozio, who was born in 1809 and who taught at Hindu College from 1826 to 1831.
 


 

•	Derozio possessed a dazzling intellect and followed the most radical views of the time. He was inspired by the great French Revolution.

•	Derazio and his famous followers, known as the Derozians and Young Bengal, were fiery patriots. Perhaps, he was the first nationalist poet of modern India.

•	Derozio was removed from the Hindu College in 1831 because of his radicalism and died of cholera soon after at the young age of 22.

•	Even so, the Derozians carried forward Ram Mohan Roy's tradition of educating the people in social, economic, and political questions through newspapers, pamphlets, and public associations.

•	Surendranath Banerjee, the famous leader of the nationalist movement, described the Derozians as "the pioneers of the modern civilization of Bengal, the conscript fathers of our race whose virtues will excite veneration and whose failings will be treated with gentlest consideration."

Tatvabodhini Sabha
•	In 1839, Debendranath Tagore, father of Rabindranath Tagore, founded the
Tatvabodhini Sabha to propagate Ram Mohan Roy's ideas.
 



•	The Tatvabodhini Sabha and its organ the Tatvabodhini Patrika promoted a systematic study of India's past in the Bengali language.

•	In 1843, Debendranath Tagore reorganized the Brahmo Samaj and put new life into it.

•	The Samaj actively supported the movement for widow remarriage, abolition of polygamy, Women's education, improvement of the ryot's condition, etc.

Pandit Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar
•	Born in 1820 in a very poor family, Vidyasagar struggled through hardship to educate himself and in the end, became the principal of the Sanskrit College (in 1851).

•	Though Vidyasagar was a great Sanskrit scholar, his mind was open to the Western thought, and he came to represent a happy blend of Indian and Western culture.

•	Vidyasagar resigned from government service, as he would not tolerate undue official interference.

•	Vidyasagar’s generosity to the poor was fabulous. He seldom possessed a warm coat that he invariably gave it to the first naked beggar he met on the street.
 



•	Vidyasagar evolved a new technique of teaching Sanskrit. He wrote a Bengali primer which is used till this day. By his writings, he helped in the evolution of a modern prose style in Bengali.

•	Vidyasagar opened the gates of the Sanskrit college to non-Brahmin students as well.

•	To free Sanskrit studies from the harmful effects of self-imposed isolation, Vidyasagar introduced the study of Western thought in the Sanskrit College. He also helped to establish a college, which is now named after him.

•	He raised his powerful voice, backed by the weight of immense traditional learning, in favor of widow remarriage in 1855.

•	The first lawful Hindu widow remarriage among the upper castes in India was celebrated in Calcutta on 7 December 1856 under the inspiration and supervision of Vidyasagar.

•	In 1850, Vidyasagar protested against child-marriage. All his life, he campaigned against polygamy.

•	As a Government Inspector of Schools, Vidyasagar organized thirty five girls’ schools, many of which he ran at his own expense.

•	The Bethune School, founded in Calcutta in 1849, was the first fruit of the powerful movement for women’s education that arose in the 1840s and 1850s.

•	As Secretary to the Bethune School, Vidyasagar was one of the innovators of higher education for women.

•	In 1848, several educated young men formed the Students’ Literary and Scientific Society, which had two branches, the Gujarati and the Marathi (Dnyan Prasarak Mandlis).

Jotiba Phule
•	In 1851, Jotiba Phule and his wife started a girls’ school at Poona and soon many other schools came up.

•	Phule was also a pioneer of the widow remarriage movement in Maharashtra.

•	Vishnu Shastri Pundit founded the Widow Remarriage Association in the 1850s.

•	Karsandas Mulji started a weekly paper in Gujarati called “the Satya Prakash” in 1852 to advocate widow remarriage.
 



•	An outstanding champion of a new learning and social reform in Maharashtra was Gopal Hari Deshmukh who became famous by the penname of ‘Lokahitawadi.’

•	Deshmukh advocated the reorganization of Indian society on rational principles and modern humanistic and secular values.

•	Dadabhahi Naoroji was another leading social reformer of Bombay. He was one of the founders of an association to reform the Zoroastrian religion and the Parsi Law Association which agitated for the grant of a legal status to women and for uniform laws of inheritance and marriage for the Parsis.
 











•	In 1857, a Revolt broke out in Northern and Central India and nearly swept away British rule.

•	The Revolt began with a mutiny of the sepoys, or the Indian soldiers of the Company's army, but soon engulfed wide regions and people. Millions of peasants, artisans, and soldiers fought heroically for over a year and by their courage and sacrifice wrote a glorious chapter in the history of the Indian people.

•	The Revolt of 1857 was much more than a mere product of sepoy discontent. It was, in reality, a product of the accumulated grievances of the people against the Company's administration and of their dislike for the foreign regime.

Immediate Cause of Revolt
•	By 1857, the material for a mass upheaval was ready, only a spark was needed to set it afire.

•	The new Enfield rifle had been introduced in the army. Its cartridges had a greased paper cover whose end had to be bitten of before the cartridge was loaded into the rifle.
 
Indian History


•	The grease was in some instances composed of beef and pig fat. The sepoys, Hindu as well as Muslim, were enraged, as the use of the greased cartridges would endanger their religion.

•	Many of the sepoys, believed that the Government was deliberately trying to destroy their religion.
 











•	The major causes of 1857 Revolt can be studied under the following heads:

Economic Cause
•	Perhaps the most important cause of the people’s discontent was the economic exploitation of the country by the British and the complete destruction of its traditional economic fabric.

Socio-Political Cause
•	Other general causes of revolt were the British land revenue policies and the systems of law and administration. In particular, a large number of peasant proprietors lost their lands to traders and most of the lenders found themselves hopelessly burden under debt.

•	The common people were hard hit by the prevalence of corruption at the lower levels of administration. The police, petty officials, and lower (law) courts were notoriously corrupt.

•	The middle and upper classes of Indian society, particularly in the North, were hard hit by their exclusion from the well-paid higher posts in the administration.

•	Displacement of Indian rulers by the East India Company meant the sudden withdrawal of the patronage and the impoverishment of those who had depended upon it.

•	Religious preachers, pandits, and maulavis, who felt that their entire future was threatened, were to play an important role in spreading hatred against the foreign rule.

•	The British remained perpetual foreigners in the country. For one, there was no social link or communication between them and the Indians.

•	Unlike foreign conquerors before them, they did not mix socially even with the upper classes of Indians; instead, they had a feeling of racial superiority and treated Indians with contempt and arrogance.

•	The British did not come to settle in India and to make it their home. Their main objective was to enrich themselves and then go back to Britain along with Indian wealth.
 

•	Munshi Mohanlal of Delhi, who remained loyal to the British during the Revolt, wrote that even "those who bad grown rich under British rule showed hidden delight at British reverses." Another loyalist, Moinuddin Hasan Khan, pointed out that the people looked upon the British as "foreign trespassers."

•	The British army suffered major reverses in the First Afghan War (1838-42) and the Punjab Wars (1845-49), and the Crimean War (I854-56).

•	In 1855-56, the Santhal tribesmen of Bihar and Bengal rose up armed with axes and bows and arrows and revealed the potentialities of a popular uprising by temporarily sweeping away British rule from their area.

•	The British ultimately won these wars and suppressed the Santhal uprising; however, the disasters British suffered in major battles revealed that the British army could be defeated by determined fighting, even by an Asian army.

•	The annexation of Avadh by Lord Dalhousie in 1856 was widely resented in India in general and in Avadh in particular. It created an atmosphere of rebellion in Avadh and in the Company's army.

•	Dalhousie's action angered the Company's sepoys, as most of them came from Avadh.

•	The annexations rule of Dalhousie, created panic among rulers of the native states. They now discovered that their most groveling loyalty to the British had failed to satisfy the British greed for territory.

•	This policy of annexation was, for example, directly responsible for making Nana Sahib, the Rani of Jhansi, and Bahadur Shah their staunch enemies.

•	Nana Sahib was the adopted son of Baji Rao II, the last Peshwa. The British refused to grant Nana Sahib the pension they were paying to Baji Rao II, who died in 1851.

•	The British insistence on the annexation of Jhansi incensed the proud of Rani Lakshmibai who wanted her adopted son to succeed her deceased husband.

•	The house of the Mughals was humiliated when Dalhousie announced in 1849 that the Successor to Bahadur Shah would have to abandon the historic Red Fort and move to a humbler residence at the Qutab on the outskirts of Delhi.

•	In 1856, Canning announced that after Bahadur Shah's death, the Mughals would lose the title of kings and would be known as mere princes.
 

Religious Cause
•	An important role in turning the people against British rule was played by their fear that it endangered their religion. This fear was largely due to the activities of the Christian missionaries who were "to be seen everywhere — in the schools, in the hospitals, in the prisons and at the market place."

•	The missionaries tried to convert people and made violent and vulgar public attacks on Hinduism and Islam. They openly ridiculed and denounced the long cherished customs and traditions of the people.

•	In 1850, the Government enacted a law, which enabled a convert to Christianity to inherit his ancestral property.

•	Religious sentiments were also hurt by the official policy of taxing lands belonging to temples and mosques and to their priests or the charitable institutions which had been exempted from taxation by previous Indian rulers.

•	The many Brahmin and Muslim families dependent on the religious activities were aroused to fury, and they began to propagate that the British were trying to undermine the religions of India.

•	The sepoys also had religious or caste grievances of their own. The Indians of those days were very strict in observing caste rules, etc.

•	The military authorities forbade the sepoys to wear caste and sectarian marks, beards, or turbans.

•	In 1856, an Act was passed under which every new recruit undertook to serve even overseas, if required. This hurt the sepoys' sentiments as, according to the current religious belief of the Hindus, travel across the sea was forbidden and led to less of caste.

Historical Cause
•	The sepoys also had numerous other grievances against their employers. They were treated with contempt by their British officers.

•	The sepoys' dissatisfaction was because of the recent order that they would not be given the Foreign Service allowance (batta) when serving in Sindh or in the Punjab. This order resulted in a big cut in the salaries of a large number of them.

•	The dissatisfaction of the sepoys had, in fact, a long history. A sepoy mutiny had broken out in Bengal as early as 1764. The authorities had suppressed it by blowing away 30 sepoys.
 

•	In 1806, the sepoys at Vellore mutinied but were crushed with terrible violence.

•	In 1824, the 47th Regiment of sepoys at Barrackpore refused to go to Burma by the sea-route. The Regiment was disbanded, its unarmed men were fired upon by artillery, and the leaders of the sepoys were hanged.

•	In 1844, seven battalions revolted on the question of salaries and batta.

•	The sepoys in Afghanistan were on the verge of revolt during the Afghan War. Two subedars, a Muslim and a Hindu, were shot dead for giving expression to the discontent in the army.

Beginning of Revolt - Views
•	It is not yet clear whether the Revolt of 1857 was spontaneous, un-planned, or the result of a careful and secret organization.

•	The revolts have left behind no records. As they worked illegally, they perhaps kept no records.

•	The British suppressed any favorable mention of the Revolt, and took strong action against anyone who tried to present their side of the story.

•	A group of historians and writers has asserted that the Revolt was the result of a widespread and well-organized conspiracy. They pointed to the circulation of chapattis and red lotuses, propaganda by wandering as sanyasis, faqirs, and madaris.

•	The historians say that many of the Indian regiments were carefully linked in a secret organization which had fixed 31 May 1857 as the day when all of them were to revolt.

•	It is also said that Nana Sahib and Maulvi Ahmed Shah of Faizabad were playing leading roles in this conspiracy.

•	Some other writers equally forcefully deny that any careful planning went into the making of the Revolt. They point out that not a scrap of paper was discovered before or after the Revolt indicating an organized conspiracy, nor did a single witness come forward to make such a claim.

•	The truth perhaps lies somewhere between these two extreme views. It sterns likely that there was an organized conspiracy to revolt but that the organization had not progressed sufficiently when the Revolt broke out accidentally.
 











•	The Revolt began at Meerut, 36 miles from Delhi, on 10 May 1857 and then gathering force rapidly spread across Northern India. It soon embraced a vast area from the Punjab in the North and the Narmada in the South to Bihar in the East and Rajputana in the West.

•	Even before the outbreak at Meerut, Mangal Pande had become a martyr at
Barrackpore.

•	Mangal Pande, a young soldier, was hanged on 29 March 1857 for revolting single-handed and attacking his superior officers. This and many similar incidents were a sign that discontent and rebellion were brewing among the sepoy, and then came the explosion at Meerut.
 


 

•	On 24 April 1857, ninety men of the 3rd Native Cavalry refused to accept the greased cartridges. On 9 May 1857, eighty five of them were dismissed, sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment, and put into fetters. This sparked off a general mutiny among the Indian soldiers stationed at Meerut.

•	The very next day, on 10 May, sepoys released their imprisoned comrades, killed their officers, and unfurled the banner of revolt. As if drawn by a magnet they set off for Delhi after sunset.

•	When the Meerut soldiers appeared in Delhi the next morning, the local infantry joined them, killed their own European officers, and seized the city.

•	The rebellious soldiers proclaimed the aged and powerless Bahadur Shah the Emperor of India.

•	Delhi was soon to become the center of the Great Revolt and Bahadur Shah its great symbol.

•	Bahadur Shah, in turn, under the instigation and perhaps the pressure of the sepoys, soon wrote letters to all the chiefs and rulers of India urging them to organize a confederacy of Indian states to fight and replace the British regime.

•	The entire Bengal Army soon rose in revolt which spread quickly. Avadh, Rohlikhand, the Bundelkhand, Central India, large parts of Bihar, and the East Punjab, all shook off British authority.

•	In many of the princely states, rulers remained loyal to their British overlord but the soldiers revolted or remained on the brink of revolt.
 

•	More than 20,000 of Gwalior's troops went over to Tantia Tope and the Rani of Jhansi.

•	Many small chiefs of Rajasthan and Maharashtra, revolted with the support of the people, who were quite hostile to the British. Local rebellions also occurred in Hyderabad and Bengal.

•	The tremendous sweep and breadth of the Revolt were matched by its depth. Everywhere in Northern and Central India, the mutiny of the sepoys was followed by popular revolts of the civilian population.

•	After the sepoys had destroyed British authority, the common people was up in arms often lighting with spears and axes, bows and arrows, lathis and scythes, and crude muskets.

•	It was the wide participation to the Revolt by the peasantry and the artisans which gave it real strength as well as the character of a popular revolt, especially in the areas at present included in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.

•	The popular character of the Revolt of 1857 also became evident when the British tried to smash it. They had to wage a vigorous and ruthless war not only against the rebellious sepoys but also against the people of Avadh, North- Western Provinces and Agra, Central India, and Western Bihar, burning entire villages and massacring villagers and urban people.

•	The sepoys and the people fought staunchly and valiantly up to the very end. They were defeated but their spirit remained unbroken.

•	Much of the strength of the Revolt of 1857 lay in Hindu-Muslim unity. Among the soldiers and the people as well as among the leaders there was complete cooperation as between Hindus and Muslims.

•	In fact, the events of 1857 clearly bring out that the people and politics of India were not basically communal in medieval times and before 1858.
 











•	The storm-centers of the Revolt of 1857 were:

•	Delhi,

•	Kanpur,

•	Lucknow,

•	Jhansi, and

•	Arrah in Bihar.

Delhi
•	At Delhi, the nominal and symbolic; leadership belonged to the Emperor Bahadur Shah, but the real command lay with a Court of Soldiers headed by General Bakht Khan who had led the revolt of the Bareilly troops and brought them to Delhi.

•	In the British army, Bakht Khan was an ordinary subedar of artillery.

•	Bakht Khan represented the popular and plebian element at the headquarters of the Revolt.

•	After the British occupation of Delhi in September 1857, Bakht Khan went to Lucknow and continued to fight the British till he died in a battle on 13 May 1859.

•	The Emperor Bahadur Shah was perhaps the weakest link in the chain of leadership of the Revolt.

Kanpur
•	At Kanpur, the Revolt was led by Nana Sahib, the adopted son of Baji Rao II, the last Peshwa.

•	Nana Sahib expelled the English from Kanpur with the help of the sepoys and proclaimed himself the Peshwa. At the same time, he acknowledged Bahadur Shah as the Emperor of India and declared himself to be his Governor.

•	The chief burden of fighting on behalf of Nana Sahib fell on the shoulders of Tantia Tope, one of his most loyal servants.
 



•	Tantia Tope has won immortal fame by his patriotism, determined fighting, and skillful guerrilla operations.

•	Azimullah was another loyal servant of Nana Sahib. He was an expert in political propaganda.

•	Unfortunately, Nana Sahib tarnished his (Azimullah’s) brave record by deceitfully killing the garrison at Kanpur after he had agreed to give them safe conduct.

Lucknow
•	The revolt at Lucknow was led by the Begum of Avadh who had proclaimed her young son, Birjis Kadr, as the Nawab of Avadh.

Jhansi
•	One of the great leaders of the Revolt of 1857 and perhaps one of the greatest heroines of Indian history, was the young Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi.

•	The young Rani joined the rebels when the British refused to acknowledge her right to adopt an heir to the Jhansi gaddi (throne) annexed her state, and threatened to treat her as an instigator of the rebellion of the sepoys at Jhansi.

•	Rani captured Gwalior with the help of Tantia Tope and her trusted Afghan guards.
 

•	Maharaja Sindhia, loyal to the British, made an attempt to fight the Rani but most of his troops deserted to her.

•	The brave Rani died fighting on 17 June 1858.

Arrah (Bihar)
•	Kunwar Singh, a ruined and discontented zamindar of Jagdishpur near Arrah, was the chief organizer of the Revolt in Bihar.

•	Though nearly 80 years old, Kunwar Singh was perhaps the most outstanding military leader and strategist of the Revolt.

•	Kunwar Singh fought with the British in Bihar, and, later joined hands with Nana Sahib's forces; he also campaigned in Avadh and Central India.

•	Racing back home, Kunwar Singh treated the British forts near Arrah. But this proved to be his last battle. He had sustained a fatal wound in the fighting. He died on 27 April 1858 in his ancestral house in the village of Jagdishpur.

•	Maulavi Ahmadullah of Faizabad was another outstanding leader of the Revolt. He was a native of Madras where he had started preaching armed rebellion.

•	In January 1857, Maulavi Ahmadullah moved towards the North to Faizabad where he fought a largescale battle against a company of British troops sent to stop him from preaching sedition.

•	When the general Revolt broke out in May, Maulavi Ahmadullah emerged as one of its acknowledged leaders in Avadh. After the defeat at Lucknow, he led the rebellion in Rohilkhand where he was treacherously killed by the Raja of Puwain who was received Rs 50,000 as a reward by the British.
 











•	The Revolt was suppressed. Sheer courage could not win against a powerful and determined enemy who planned its every step.

•	The rebels were dealt an early blow when the British captured Delhi on 20 September 1857 after prolonged and bitter fighting.

•	The aged Emperor Bahadur Shah was taken prisoner. The Royal Princes were captured and butchered on the spot. The Emperor was tried and exiled to Rangoon where he died in 1862.

•	John Lawrence, Outran, Havelock, Neil, Campbell, and Hugh Rose were some of the British commanders who earned military fame in the course of the revolt.

•	One by one, all the great leaders of the Revolt fell. Nana Sahib was defeated at Kanpur. Defiant to the very end and refusing to surrender, he escaped to Nepal early in 1859, never to be heard of again.

•	Tantia Tope escaped into the jungles of Central India where he carried on bitter and brilliant guerrilla warfare until April 1859 when he was betrayed by a zamindar friend and captured while asleep. He was put to death after a hurried trial on 15 April 1859.

•	The Rani Jhansi had died on the field of battle earlier on 17 June 1858.
 
Indian History



•	By 1859, Kunwar Singh, Bakht Khan, Khan Bahadur Khan of Bareilly, Rao Sahib brother of Nana Sahib, and Maulavi Ahmadullah were all dead, while the Begum of Avadh was compelled to hide in Nepal.

•	By the end of 1859, British authority over India was fully reestablished, but the Revolt had not been in vain. It was the first great struggle of the Indian people for freedom from British imperialism. It paved the way for the rise of the modern national movement.

Weaknesses of Revolt
•	Indian sepoys and people were short of modern weapons and other materials of war. Most of them fought with such ancient weapons as pikes and swords.

•	Indian sepoys and other revolt participants were also poorly organized. There was communication gap and they lacked consensus.

•	The rebel units did not have a common plan of action, or authoritative heads, or centralized leadership.

•	The sepoys were brave and selfless but they were also ill-disciplined. Sometimes they behaved more like a riotous mob than a disciplined army.

•	The uprisings in different parts of the country were completely uncoordinated.

•	Once the Indian people overthrew British power from an area, they did not know what sort of power to create in its place.

•	They failed to evolve unity of action. They were suspicious and jealous of one another and often indulged in suicidal quarrels. For example, the Begum of Avadh quarreled with Maulavi Ahmadullah and the Mughal princes with the sepoy-generals.

•	The peasants destroyed revenue records and money-lenders' books, and overthrown the new zamindars, became passive not knowing what to do next.

•	Modern nationalism was yet unknown in India. Patriotism meant love of one's small locality or region or at most one's state.

•	In fact, the Revolt of 1857 played an important role in bringing the Indian people together and imparting to them the consciousness of belonging to one country.
 











•	Even though spread over a vast territory and widely popular among the people, the Revolt of 1857 could not embrace the entire country or all the groups and classes of Indian society.

•	Most rulers of the Indian states and the big zamindars, selfish to the core and fearful of British might, refused to join in.

•	On the contrary, the Sindhia of Gwalior, the Holkar of Indore, the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Raja of Jodhpur and other Rajput rulers, the Nawab of Bhopal, the rulers of Patiala, Nabha, Jind, and Kashmir, the Ranas of Nepal, and many other ruling chiefs, and a large number of big zamindars gave active help to the British in suppressing the Revolt. In fact, no more than one per cent of the chiefs of India joined the Revolt.

•	Governor-General Canning later remarked that these rulers and chiefs "acted as the breakwaters to the storm which would have otherwise swept us in one great wave."

•	Madras, Bombay, Bengal, and the Western Punjab remained undisturbed, even though the popular feeling in these provinces favored the rebels.

•	Except for the discontented and the dispossessed zamindars, the middle and upper classes were mostly critical of the rebels; most of the propertied classes were either cool towards them or actively hostile to them.

•	The money-lenders were the chief targets of the villagers' attacks. They were, therefore, naturally hostile to the Revolt.

•	The merchants too gradually became unfriendly. The rebels were compelled to impose heavy taxation on them in order to finance the war or to seize their stocks of foodstuffs to feed the army.

•	The merchants often hid their wealth and goods and refused to give free supplies to the rebels.

•	The big merchants or Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras supported the British because their main profits came from foreign trade and economic connections with the British merchants.

•	The zamindars of Bengal also remained loyal to the British. They were after all a creation of the British.
 
Indian History

•	The modern educated Indians also did not support the Revolt. They were repelled by the rebels' appeals to superstitions and their opposition to progressive social measures.

•	The educated Indians wanted to end the backwardness of the country. They mistakenly believed that British rule would help them accomplish these tasks of modernization while the rebels would take the country backward.

•	The revolutionaries of 1857 proved to be more farsighted in this respect; they had a better, instinctive understanding of the evils of foreign rule and of the necessity to get rid of it.

•	On the other hand, they did not realize, as did the educated intelligentsia, that the country had fallen prey to foreigners precisely because it had stuck to rotten and outmoded customs, traditions, and institutions.

•	In any case, it cannot be said that the educated Indians were anti-national or loyal to a foreign regime. As events after 1858 were to show, they were soon to lead a powerful and modem national movement against British rule.
 











•	The Revolt of 1857 gave a severe jolt to the British administration in India and made its reorganization inevitable.

Introduction
•	An Act of Parliament in 1858 transferred the power to govern from the East India Company to the British Crown.

•	While authority over India had previously been wielded by the Directors of the Company and the Board of Control, now this power was to be exercised by a Secretary of State for India aided by a Council.

•	The Secretary of State was a member of the British Cabinet and as such was responsible to Parliament. Thus the ultimate power over India remained with British Parliament.

•	By 1869, the Council was completely subordinated to the Secretary of State. Most of the members of the India Council were retired British-Indian officials.

•	Under the Act, a government was to be carried on as before by the Governor- General who was also given the title of Viceroy or Crown's personal representative.

•	Viceroy was paid two and a half lakhs of rupees a year in addition to his other allowances.

•	With the passage of time, the Viceroy was increasingly reduced to a subordinate status in relation to the British Government in matters of policy as well as the execution of policy.

•	As a result of the Regulating Act, Pitt's India Act, and the later Charter Acts the Government of India was being effectively controlled from London.

•	Instructions from London took a few weeks to arrive and the Government of India had often to take important policy decisions in a hurry. Control by the authorities in London was therefore often more in the nature of post facto evaluation and criticism than of actual direction.

•	By 1870, a submarine cable had been laid through the Red Sea between England and India. Orders from London could now reach India in a matter of hours.
 

•	The Secretary of State could now control the minutest details of administration and do so constantly every hour of the day.

•	No Indian had a voice in the India Council or the British Cabinet or Parliament. Indians could hardly even approach such distant masters.

•	In a given condition, Indian opinion had even less impact on government policy than before. On the other hand, British industrialists, merchants, and bankers increased their Influence over the Government of India.

•	In India, the Act of 1858 provided that the Governor-General would have an Executive Council whose members were to act as heads of different departments and as his official advisers.

•	The position of the members of the Council was similar to that of Cabinet ministers. Originally there were five members of this Council but by 1918, there were six ordinary members, apart from the Commander-in-Chief who headed the Army Department.

•	The Council discussed all important matters and decided them by a majority vote; but the Governor-General had the power to override any important decision of the Council. In fact, gradually all power was concentrated in the Governor-General's hands.

•	The Indian Councils Act of 1861 enlarged the Governor-General's Council for the purpose of making laws in which capacity it was known as the Imperial Legislative Council.

•	The Governor-General was authorized to add to his Executive Council between six and twelve members of whom at least half had to be non-officials who could be Indian or English.

•	The Imperial Legislative Council possessed no real powers and should not be seen as a sort of elementary or weak parliament. It was merely an advisory body. It could not discuss any important measure, and no financial measures at all, without the previous approval of the Government.

•	The Imperial Legislative Council had no control over the budget. It could not discuss the notions of the administration; the members could not even ask questions about them. The Legislative Council had no control over the executive.

•	No bill passed by Legislative Council could become an Act until it was approved by the Governor-General.
 

•	The Secretary of State could disallow any of its Acts. Thus, the only important function of the Legislative Council was to ditto official measures and give them the appearance of having been passed by a legislative body.

•	The Indian members of the Legislative Council were few in number and were not elected by the Indian people, but rather were nominated by the Governor- General whose choice invariably fell on princes and their ministers, big zamindars, big merchants, or retired senior government officials.

•	For the better understanding, we can study the major administrative changes under the following heads:

o	Provincial Administration

o	Local Bodies

o	Change in Army

o	Public Services

o	Relations with Princely States

o	Administrative Policies and

o	Extreme Backwardness of Social Services

•	All these headings have been described briefly in subsequent chapters (with the same headings).
 











•	For the administrative convenience, the British had divided India into provinces; three of which — Bengal, Madras, and Bombay were known as Presidencies.

•	The Presidencies were administered by a Governor and his three Executive Councils, who were appointed by the Crown.

•	The Presidency Governments possessed more rights and powers than other provinces. Other provinces were administered by Lieutenant Governors and Chief Commissioners appointed by the Governor-General.

•	The Act of 1861 marked the turning of the tide of centralization. It laid down that legislative councils similar to that of the center should be established first in Bombay, Madras, and Bengal and then in other provinces.

•	The provincial legislative councils also were mere advisory bodies consisting of officials and four to eight non-official Indians and Englishmen. They also lacked the powers or a democratic parliament.

•	The evil of extreme centralization was most obvious in the field of finance. The revenues from all over the country and from different sources were gathered at the center and then distributed by it to the provincial governments.

•	The Central Government exercised authoritarian control over the smallest details of provincial expenditure. But this system proved quite wasteful in practice. It was not possible for the Central Government to supervise the efficient collection of revenues by a provincial government or to keep adequate check over its expenditure.

•	The two governments constantly quarreled over minute details of administration and expenditure, and, on the other, a provincial government had no motive to be economical. The authorities therefore decided to decentralize public finance.

•	In 1870, Lord Mayo had taken the first step in the direction of separating central and provincial finances. The provincial governments were granted fixed sums out of central revenues for the administration of certain services like Police, Jails, Education, Medical Services, and Roads and were asked to administer them as they wished.
 
Indian History

•	Lord Mayo's scheme was enlarged in 1877 by Lord Lytton who transferred to the provinces certain other heads of expenditure such as Land Revenue, Excise, General Administration, and Law and Justice.

•	To meet the additional expenditure, a provincial government was to get a fixed share of the income realized from that province from certain sources like Stamps, Excise Taxes, and Income Tax.

•	In 1882, Lord Ripon had brought some changes. The system of giving fixed grants to the provinces was ended and, instead, a province was to get the entire income within it from certain sources of revenue and a fixed share of the income.

•	Thus all sources of the revenue were now divided into three heads as:

o	General,

o	Provincial, and

o	Those to be divided between the center and the provinces.

•	The financial arrangements between the center and the provinces were to be reviewed every five years.
 


•	Financial difficulties led the Government to further decentralize administration by promoting local government through municipalities and district hoards.

•	Local bodies were first formed between 1864 and 1868, but almost in every case, they consisted of nominated members and were presided over by the District Magistrates.

•	The local bodies did not represent local self-government at all nor did the intelligent Indians accept them as such. The Indians looked upon them as instruments for the extraction of additional taxes from the people.

•	In 1882, Lord Ripon Government laid down the policy of administering local affairs largely through rural and urban local bodies, a majority of whose members would be non-officials.

•	The non-official members would be elected by the people wherever and whenever officials felt that it was possible to introduce elections.

•	The resolution also permitted the election of a non-official as Chairman of a local body.

•	The provincial acts were passed to implement this resolution. But the elected members were in a minority in all the district boards and in many of the municipalities.

•	Elected members were, moreover, elected by a small number of voters since the right to vote was severely restricted.

•	District officials continued to act as presidents of district boards though non- officials gradually became chairmen of municipal committees.

•	The Government also retained the right to exercise strict control over the activities of the local bodies and to suspend and supersede them at its own discretion.

•	The local bodies functioned just like departments of the Government and were in no way good examples of local self-government.
 


•	The Indian army was carefully reorganized after 1858. Some changes were made necessary by the transfer of power to the Crown.

•	The East India Company's European forces were merged with the Crown troops. But the army was reorganized most of all to prevent the recurrence of another revolt.

•	The rulers had seen that their bayonets were the only secure foundation of their rule. Several following steps were taken to minimize, if not completely eliminate, the capacity of Indian soldiers to revolt:

o	The domination of the army by its European branch was carefully guaranteed.

o	The proportion of Europeans to Indians in the army was raised and fixed at one to two in the Bengal Army and two to five in the Madras and Bombay armies.

o	The European troops were kept in key geographical and military positions. The crucial branches of the army like artillery and, later in the 20th century, tanks, and armored corps were put exclusively in European hands.

o	The older policy of excluding Indians from the officer corps was strictly maintained. Till 1914, no Indian could rise higher than the rank of a subedar.

o	The organization of the Indian section of the army was based on the policy of "balance and counterpoise" or "divide and rule" so as to prevent its chances of uniting again in an anti-British uprising.

o	Discrimination on the basis of caste, region, and religion was practiced, in recruitment to the army.

o	A fiction was created that Indians consisted of "martial" and "non-martial" classes.

o	Soldiers from Avadh, Bihar, Central India, and South India who had first helped the British conquer India but had later taken part in the Revolt of 1857, were declared to be non-martial. They were no longer taken in the army on a large scale.
 
Indian History

o	The Sikhs, Gurkhas, and Pathans, who had assisted in the suppression of the Revolt, were declared to be martial and were recruited in large numbers.

o	The Indian regiments were made a mixture of various castes' and groups' which were so placed as to balance each other.

o	Communal, caste, tribal, and regional loyalties were encouraged among the soldiers, so that the sentiment of nationalism would not grow among them.

o	It was isolated from nationalist ideas by every possible means. Newspapers, journals, and nationalist publications were prevented from reaching the soldiers.

•	Later, all such efforts failed in the long run and sections of the Indian army played an important role in our struggle for freedom.
 


•	All positions of power and responsibility in the administration were occupied by the members of the Indian Civil Service who were recruited through an annual open competitive examination held in London.

•	Indians also could sit in this examination. Satyendranath Tagore, brother of Rabindranath Tagore, was the first Indian civil servant.

•	Almost every year, thereafter, one or two Indians joined the coveted ranks of the Civil Service, but their number was negligible compared to the English entrants.

•	In practice, the doors of the Civil Service remained barred to Indians because:

o	The competitive examination was held in faraway London;

o	It was conducted through the medium of the alien English language;

o	It was based on Classical Greek and Latin learning, which could be acquired only after a prolonged and costly course of studies in England; and

o	The maximum age for entry into the Civil Service was gradually reduced from twenty-three in 1859 to nineteen in 1878.

•	In other departments of administration such as: Police, Public Works Department, and Railways the superior and highly paid posts were reserved for British citizens.

•	The rulers of India believed it to be an essential condition for the maintenance of British supremacy in India.

•	The Viceroy, Lord Lansdowne, stressed "the absolute necessity of keeping the government of this widespread Empire in European hands, if that Empire is to be maintained."

•	The Indians, in the civil services, functioned as agents of British rule and loyally served Britain's imperial purposes.

•	Under Indian pressure, the different administrative services were gradually Indianised after 1918, but the positions of control and authority were still kept in British hands. Moreover, the people soon discovered that Indianisation of these services had not put any part of political power in their hands.
 


•	Before 1857, British had availed themselves of every opportunity to annex princely states. The Revolt of 1857 led the British to reverse their policy towards the Indian States.

•	Most of the Indian princes had not only remained loyal to the British but had actively assisted in suppressing the Revolt.

•	Canning declared in 1862 that “the Crown of England stood forward, the unquestioned Ruler and Paramount Power in all India.” Princes were made to acknowledge Britain as the paramount power.

•	In 1876, Queen Victoria assumed the title of the ‘Empress of India’ to emphasize British sovereignty over the entire Indian subcontinent.

 
Indian History

•	Lord Curzon later made it clear that the princes ruled their states merely as agents of the British Crown. The princes accepted this subordinate position and willingly became junior partners in the Empire because they were assured of their continued existence as rulers of their states.

•	As the paramount power, the British claimed the right to supervise the internal government of the princely states. They not only interfered in the day to day administration through the Residents but insisted on appointing and dismissing ministers and other high officials.

•	After 1868, the Government recognized the adopted heir of the old ruler and in 1881, the state was fully restored to the young Maharajah.

•	In 1874, the ruler of Baroda, Malhar Rao Gaekwad, was accused of misrule and of trying to poison the British Resident and was deposed after a brief trial.
 











•	The British attitude towards India and, consequently, their policies in India changed for the worse after the revolt of 1857, they now consciously began to follow reactionary policies.

•	The view was now openly put forward that the Indians were unfit to rule themselves and that they must be ruled by Britain for an indefinite period. This reactionary policy was reflected in many fields.

Divide and Rule Policy
•	The British had conquered India by taking advantage of the disunity among the Indian powers and by playing them against one another.

•	After 1858, the British continued to follow the policy of divide and rule by turning the princes against the people, province against province, caste against caste, group against group, and, above all, Hindus against Muslims.

•	The unity displayed by Hindus and Muslims during the Revolt of 1857 had disturbed the foreign rulers. They were determined to break this unity so as to weaken the rising nationalist movement.

•	Immediately after the Revolt, the British repressed Muslims, confiscated their lands and property on a large scale, and declared Hindus to be their favorites. However, after 1870, this policy was reversed and an attempt was made to turn upper class and middle class Muslims against the nationalist movement.

•	Because of industrial and commercial backwardness and the near absence of social services, the educated Indians depended almost entirely on government service. This led to keen competition among them for the available government posts.

•	The Government utilized this competition to foment provincial and communal rivalry and hatred. It promised official favors on a communal basis in return for loyalty and so played the educated Muslims against the educated Hindus.

Hostility to Educated Indians
•	The Government of India had actively encouraged modern education after 1833.

•	The Universities of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras were started in 1857 and higher education spread rapidly thereafter.
 



•	Many British officials commended the refusal by educated Indians to participate in the Revolt of 1857. But this favorable official attitude towards the educated Indians soon changed because some of them had begun to use their recently acquired modern knowledge to analyze the imperialistic character of British rule and to put forward demands for Indian participation in administration.

•	The officials became actively hostile to higher education and to the educated Indians when the latter began to organize a nationalist movement among the people and founded the Indian National Congress in 1885.

•	The officials took active steps to curtail higher education. They sneered at the educated Indians whom they commonly referred to as ‘babus.’

•	Thus the British turned against that group of Indians who had imbibed modern Western knowledge and who stood for progress along modern lines. Such progress was, however, opposed to the basic interests and policies of British imperialism in India.

•	The official opposition to the educated Indians and higher education shows that British rule in India had already exhausted whatever potentialities for progress it originally possessed.

Attitude towards Zamindars
•	The British now offered friendship to the most reactionary group of Indians, the princes, the zamindars, and the landlords.

•	The zamindars and landlords too were placated in the same manner. For example, the lands of most of the talukdars of Avadh were restored to them.

•	The zamindars and landlords were now hailed as the traditional and 'natural' leaders of the Indian people. Their interests and privileges were protected. They were secured in the possession of their land at the cost of the peasants and were utilized as counter weights against the nationalist-minded intelligentsia.


•	The zamindars and landlords in return recognized that their position was closely bound up with the maintenance of British rule and became its only firm supporters.

Attitude towards Social Reforms
•	As a part of the policy of alliance with the conservative classes, the British abandoned their previous policy of helping the social reformers.
 

•	The British believed that their measures of social reform, such as the abolition of the custom of Sati and permission to widows to remarry, had been a major cause of the Revolt of 1857.

•	Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru has put it in his book “The Discovery of India," Because of this natural alliance of the British power with the reactionaries in India, it became the guardian and upholder of many an evil custom and practice, which it otherwise condemned."

•	It may, however, be noted that the British did not always remain neutral on social questions. By supporting the status quo they indirectly gave protection to existing social evils.

•	By encouraging casteism and communalism for political purposes, British actively encouraged the social reaction.

Restrictions on the Press
•	The British had introduced the printing press in India and thus initiated the development of the modern press.

•	The educated Indians had immediately recognized that the press could play a great role in educating public opinion and in influencing the government policies through criticism and censure.

•	Ram Mohan Roy, Vdyasagar, Dadabhai Naoroji, Justice Ranade, Surendranath Banerjea, Lokmanya Tilak, G. Subramaniya Iyer, C. Karhnakara Menon, Madan Mohan Malaviya, Lala Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandra Pal, and other Indian leaders played an important part in starting newspapers and making them a powerful political force.

•	The Indian press was freed of restrictions by Charles Metcalfe in I835. This step had been welcomed enthusiastically by the educated Indians. It was one of the reasons why they had for some time supported British rule in India.

•	The nationalists gradually began to use the press to arouse national consciousness among the people and to sharply criticize the reactionary policies of the Government. This turned the officials against the Indian press and they decided to curb its freedom. This was attempted by passing the Vernacular Press Act in 1878.

•	The Press Act put serious restrictions on the freedom of the Indian language newspapers. Indian public opinion was now fully aroused and it protested loudly against the passage of this Act.

•	The protest had immediate effect and the Act was repealed in 1882. For nearly 25 years thereafter, the Indian press enjoyed considerable freedom. But the
 

rise of the militant Swadeshi and Boycott movement after 1905 once again led to the enactment of the repressive press laws in 1908 and 1910.

Racial Antagonism
•	The British in India had always held aloof from the Indians and felt themselves be racially superior.

•	The Revolt of 1857 and the atrocities committed by both sides had further widened the gulf between the Indians and the British who now began to openly assert the doctrine of racial supremacy and practice racial arrogance.

•	Railway compartments, waiting rooms at railway stations, parks, hotels, swimming pools, clubs, etc. reserved for “Europeans only” were visible manifestations of this racialism.
 











•	The Government of India spent most of its income on the army and wars and the administrative services and starved the social services.

•	In 1886, of its total net revenue of nearly Rs. 47 crores, the Governmental India spent nearly 19.41 crores on the army and 17 crores on civil administration but less than 2 crores on education, medicine, and public health and only 65 lakhs on irrigation.

•	The few halting steps that were taken in the direction of providing services like sanitation, water supply, and public health were usually confined to urban areas, and that too to the so called civil lines of British or modern parts of the cities.

Labor Legislation
•	In the 19th century, the condition of workers in modem factories and plantations was miserable. They had to work between 12 and 16 hours a day and there was no weekly day of rest.

•	Women and children worked the same long hours as men. The wages were extremely low, ranging from Rs. 4 to 20 per month.

•	The factories were over-crowded, badly lighted and aired, and completely unhygienic. Work on machines was hazardous, and accidents very common.

•	The Government of India, which was generally pro-capitalist, took some half- hearted and 'totally inadequate steps to mitigate the sorry state of affairs in the modern factories; many of the factories were owned by the Indians.

•	The manufacturers of Britain put constant pressure on it to pass factory laws. They were afraid that cheap labor would enable Indian manufacturers to outsell them in the Indian market.

•	The first Indian Factory Act was passed in l881. The Act dealt primarily with the problem of child labor.

•	The Factory Act of 1881 laid down that the child below 7 could not work in factories, while the children between 7 and 12 would not work for more than 9 hours a day. Children would also get four holidays in a month.

•	The Act also provided for the proper fencing around the dangerous machinery.
 
Indian History

•	The second Indian Factory Act was passed in 1891, it provided for a weekly holiday for all workers.

•	Working hours for women were fixed at 11 per day while daily hours of work for children were reduced to 7. Hours of work for men were still left unregulated.

•	Neither of the two Acts applied to British-owned tea and coffee plantations. On the contrary, the Government gave every help to the foreign planters to exploit their workers in a most ruthless manner.

•	The Government of India gave planters full help and passed penal laws in 1863, 1865, 1870, 1873, and 1882 to enable them to do so.

•	Once a laborer had signed a contract to go and work in a plantation, he could not refuse to do so. Any breach of contract by a laborer was a criminal offence, the planter also having the power to arrest him.

•	Better labor laws were, however, passed in the 20th century under the pressure of the rising trade union movement. Still, the condition of the Indian working class remained extremely depressed and deplorable.
 












Introduction
•	Under the British rule, India developed relations with its neighbors. This was the result of two factors i.e.

o	The development of modern means of communication and

o	The political and administrative consolidation of the Country impelled the Government of India to reach out to the geographical frontiers of India.

•	The foreign policy of a free country is basically different from the foreign policy of a country ruled by a foreign power. In the former case, it is based on the needs and interests of the people of the country; and in the latter case, it serves primarily the interests of the ruling country.

•	In India's case, the foreign policy that the Government of India followed was dictated by the British Government in London.
 
Indian History



•	The British Government had two major aims in Asia and Africa i.e.

o	Protection of its invaluable Indian Empire and

o	Expansion of British commerce and other economic interests in Africa and Asia.

•	Both the aims (discussed above) led to British expansion and territorial conquests outside India's natural frontiers. These aims brought the British Government into conflict with other imperialist nations of Europe who also wanted an extension of their territorial possessions and commerce in Afro- Asian lands.

•	The years between 1870 and 1914 witnessed an intense struggle between the European powers for colonies and markets in Africa and Asia.

•	While the Indian foreign policy served British imperialism, the cost of its implementation was borne by India.

•	In pursuance of British interests, India had to wage many wars against its neighbors; the Indian soldiers had to shed their blood and the Indian taxpayers had to meet the heavy cost.

•	The Indian army was often used in Africa and Asia to fight Britain's battles.

•	British India’s relation with its neighboring countries can be studied under the following heads (which have been described briefly in subsequent chapters under the same headings):

o	Relation with Nepal

o	Relation with Burma

o	Relation with Afghanistan

o	Relation with Tibet

o	Relation with Sikkim

o	Relation with Bhutan
 











•	The British desire to extend their Indian Empire to its natural geographical frontier brought them into conflict, first of all, with the northern Kingdom of Nepal.

War with Nepal, 1814
•	The Nepal valley had been conquered in 1768 by the Gurkhas, a Western Himalayan tribe.

•	Gurkhas had gradually built up a powerful army and extended their sway from Bhutan in the East to the river Sutlej in the West.

•	From the Nepal Tarai, the Gurkha now began to push southward. In the meanwhile, the British conquered Gorakhpur in 1801. This brought the two expanding powers face to face across as ill-defined border.

•	In October 1814, a border clash between the border police of the two countries led to open war.

•	The British officials had expected an easy walk-over especially as their army attacked all along the 600 mile frontier. But the Gurkhas defended themselves with vigor and bravery. The British armies were defeated again and again.

•	In the long run, however, the Gurkhas could not survive. The British were far superior in men, money, and materials.

•	In April 1815, they occupied Kumaon, and on 15th May, they forced the brilliant Gurkha Commander Amar Singh Thapa to surrender.

•	The Government of Nepal was now compelled for peace. But the negotiations for peace soon broke down. The Government of Nepal would not accept the British demand for the stationing of a Resident at Kathmandu, capital Nepal.

•	It was realized that to accept a subsidiary alliance with the British amounted to signing away Nepal's independence. Fighting was resumed early in 1816.

•	The British forces won important victories and reached within 50 miles of Kathmandu. In the end, the Nepal Government had to make a peace agreement (known as Treaty of Sugauli) on British terms.
 
Indian History


•	Nepal Government accepted a British Resident. It ceded the districts of Garhwal and Kumaon and abandoned claims to the Tarai areas. It also withdrew from Sikkim.

•	The agreement held many advantages for the British such as:

o	Their Indian Empire now reached the Himalayas;

o	They gained greater facilities for trade with Central Asia;

o	They also obtained sites for important hill-stations such as Simla,
Mussoorie, and Nainital; and

o	The Gurkhas gave added strength to the British-Indian army by joining it in large numbers.

•	The relations of the British with Nepal were quite friendly thereafter. Both parties to the War of 1814 had learnt to respect each other's fighting capacity and preferred to live at peace with each other.
 











•	The conflict between Burma and British India was initiated by border clashes. It was whiffed by the expansionist urges.

•	The British merchants cast avaricious glances on the forest resources of Burma and were keen to promote export of their manufactures among its people.

•	The British authorities also wanted to check the spread of French commercial and political influence in Burma and the rest of South-East Asia.

•	Through three successive wars, the independent kingdom of Burma was conquered by the British during the 19th century.

First Burmese War, 1824-26
•	Burma and British India developed a common frontier at the close of the 18th century when both were expanding powers.

•	After centuries of internal strife, Burma was united by King Alaungpaya between 1752 and 1760.

•	Bodawpaya, the successor of King Alaungpaya, was ruling from Ava on the river Irrawaddi repeatedly invaded Siam, repelled many Chinese invasions, and conquered the border states of Arakan (1785) and Manipur (1813) bringing Burma's border up to that of British India. Continuing his westward expansion, he threatened Assam and the Brahmaputra Valley.

•	In 1822, the Burmese conquered Assam. The Burmese occupation of Arakan and Assam led to continuous friction along the ill-defined border between Bengal and Burma.

•	The Burmese Government pressed the British authorities to take action against the insurgents (Arakanese fugitives) and to hand them over to the Burmese authorities.

•	The Burmese forces, chasing the insurgents, would often cross into Indian Territory. In 1823, clashes on the Chittagong Arakan frontier came to a head over the possession of Shahpuri island, which was first occupied by the Burmese and then by the British.

•	The Burmese proposal for neutralization of the island was rejected by the British and tension between the two began to mount.
 

•	Burmese occupation of Manipur and Assam provided another source of conflict between the two. It was looked upon by the British authorities as a serious threat to their position in India. To counter this threat they established British influence over the strategic border states of Cachar and Jaintia.

•	The Burmese were angered by the British action and marched their troops into Cachar. A clash between Burmese and British troops ensued, the Burmese being compelled to withdraw into Manipur.

•	For several decades, British Indian authorities had been trying to persuade the Government of Burma to sign a commercial treaty with them and to exclude French traders from Burma.

•	The British believed that the Burmese power should be broken as soon as possible, especially as they felt that British power was at the time far superior to that of the Burmese. The Burmese, on their part, did nothing to avoid war.

•	The Burmese rulers had been long isolated from the world and did not correctly assess the strength of the enemy. They were also led to believe that an Anglo- Burmese war would lead many of the Indian powers to rebel.

•	The war was officially declared on 24 February 1824. After an initial set-back, the British forces drove the Burmese out of Assam, Cachar, Manipur, and Arakan.

•	The British expeditionary forces by sea occupied Rangoon in May 1824 and reached within 45 miles of the capital at Ava.

 

•	The famous Burmese General Maha Bandula was killed in April 1825. But Burmese resistance was tough and determined. Especially effective was guerrilla warfare in the jungles.

•	The rainy climate and virulent diseases added to the cruelty of the war. Fever and dysentery killed more people than the war.

•	In Rangoon, 3,160 died in hospitals and 166 on the battlefield. In all, the British lost 15,000 soldiers out of the 40,000 they had landed in Burma.

•	The war was proving extremely costly (financially as well as in terms human lives), thus the British, who were winning the war, as well as the Burmese, who were losing it, were glad to make peace which came in February 1826 with the Treaty of Yandabo.

•	The Government of Burma agreed:

o	to pay one crore rupees as war compensation;

o	to cede its coastal provinces of Arakan and Tenasserim;

o	to abandon all claims to Assam, Cachar, and Jaintia;

o	to recognize Manipur as an independent state;

o	to negotiate a commercial treaty with Britain; and

o	to accept a British Resident at Ava while posting a Burmese envoy at Calcutta.

•	By this treaty, the British deprived Burma of most of its coastline, and acquired a firm base in Burma for future expansion.

Second Burmese War (1852)
•	If the First Burmese War was in part the result of border clashes, the second Burmese War which broke out in 1852 was almost wholly the result of British commercial greed.

•	British timber firms had begun to take interest in the timber resources of Upper Burma. Moreover, the large population of Burma appeared to the British to be a vast market for the sale of British cotton goods and other manufactures.

•	The British, already in occupation of Burma's two coastal provinces, now wanted to establish commercial relations with the rest of the country, but the Burmese Government did not permit further foreign commercial penetration.
 

•	The British merchants now began to complain of ''lack of facilities for trade" and of "oppressive treatment" by the Burmese authorities at Rangoon.

•	The fact of the matter was that British imperialism was at its zenith and the British believed themselves to be a superior people. British merchants had begun to believe that they had a divine right to force their trade upon others.

•	By the time, the aggressive Lord Dalhousie became the Governor-General of India. He was determined to heighten British imperial prestige and to push British interests in Burma.

•	As an excuse for armed intervention in Burma, Dalhousie took up the frivolous and petty complaint of two British sea-captains that the Governor of Rangoon had extorted neatly 1,000 rupees from them.

•	In November 1851, Dalhousie sent an envoy, accompanied by several ships of war, to Rangoon to demand compensation for the two British merchants.

•	The British envoy, Commodore Lambert, behaved in an aggressive and unwarranted manner. On reaching Rangoon, he demanded the removal of the Governor of Rangoon before he would agree to negotiate.

•	The Court at Ava was frightened by the show of British strength and agreed to recall the Governor of Rangoon and to investigate British complaints. But the haughty British envoy was determined to provoke a conflict. He started a blockade of Rangoon and attacked and destroyed over 150 small ships in the port.

•	The Burmese Government agreed to accept a British Resident at Rangoon and to pay the full compensation demanded by the British.

•	The Government of India now turned on the screw and pushed up their demands to an exorbitant level. They demanded the recall of the new Governor of Rangoon and also an apology for alleged insults to their envoy.

•	Such demands could hardly be accepted by an independent government. Obviously, the British desired to strengthen their hold over Burma by peace or by war before their trade competitors, the French or the Americans, could establish themselves there.

•	A full British expedition was dispatched to Burma in April 1852. This time, the war was much shorter than in 1825-26 and the British victory was more decisive.
 


 
•	Rangoon was immediately captured and then other important towns—Bassein, Pegu, Prome fell to the British.

•	Burma was at this time undergoing a struggle for 'power. The Burmese King, Mindon, who had deposed his half-brother, King Pagan Min, in a struggle for power in February 1853, was hardly in a position to fight with the British; at the same time, he could not openly 'agree to surrender Burmese territory. Consequently, there were no official negotiations for peace and the war ended without a treaty.

•	The British now controlled the whole of Burma's coastline and its entire sea- trade.

•	The brunt of fighting the war was borne by Indian soldiers and its expense was wholly met from Indian revenues.

Third Burmese War (1885)
•	Relations between Burma and Britain remained peaceful for several years after the annexation of Pegu.

•	In particular, the British merchants and industrialists were attracted by the possibility of trade with China through Burma.

•	There was vigorous agitation in Britain and Rangoon for opening the land route to Western China. Finally, Burma was persuaded in 1862 to sign a commercial treaty by which British merchants were permitted to settle in any part of Burma and to take their vessels up the Irrawaddy River to China.
 

•	British merchants were impatient of restrictions on their trade and profits and began to press for stronger action against the Burmese Government. Many of them even demanded British conquest of Upper Burma. The king was finally persuaded to abolish all monopolies in February 1882.

Causes of Third Anglo-Burmese War
•	There are many other political and economic questions over which the Burmese king and the British Government clashed.

•	The British Government humiliated the king in 1871 by armoring that relations with him would be conducted through the Viceroy of India as if he were merely a ruler of one of the Indian states. Another source of friction was the attempt by the king to develop friendly relations with other European powers.

•	In 1873, a Burmese mission visited France and tried to negotiate a commercial treaty, which would also enable Burma to import modern arms, but later under British pressure, the French Government refused to ratify the treaty.

•	King Mindon died in 1878 and was succeeded by King Thibaw.

•	The British gave shelter to rival princes and openly interfered in Burma's internal affairs under the garb of preventing the alleged cruelties of King Thibaw.

•	The British thus claimed that they had the right to protect the citizens of Upper Burma from their own king.

•	Thibaw's desire to pursue his father’s policy of developing commercial and political relations with France.

•	In 1885, Thibaw signed a purely commercial treaty with France providing for trade. The British were intensely jealous of the growing French influence in Burma.

•	The British merchants feared that the rich Burmese market would be captured by their French and American rivals.

•	The British officials felt that an alliance with France might enable the king of Upper Burma to escape British tutelage or might even lead to the founding of a French dominion in Burma and so endanger the safety of their Indian Empire.

•	The French had already emerged as a major rival of Britain in South-East Asia.

•	In 1883, they had seized Annam (Central Vietnam), thus laying the foundation of their colony of Indo-China.
 

•	They were pushing actively towards North Vietnam, which they conquered between 1885 and 1889, and in the west towards Thailand and Burma.

•	The chambers of commerce in Britain and the British merchants in Rangoon now pressed the willing British Government for the immediate annexation of Upper Burma.

Immediate Cause
•	Only a pretext for war was needed. This was provided by the Bombay-Burma Trading Corporation, a British concern which held a lease of the teak forests in Burma.

•	The Burmese Government accused the Company of extracting more than double the quantity of teak contracted for by bribing local officials, and demanded compensation.

•	The British Government, which had already prepared a military plan for the attack on Upper Burma, decided to seize this opportunity and put forward many claims on the Burmese Government including the demand that the foreign relations of Burma must be placed under the control of the Viceroy of India.

•	The Burmese Government could not have accepted such demands without losing its independence. Its rejection was followed by a British invasion on 13 November 1885.

 

•	Burma as an independent country had every right to put trade restrictions on foreigners. Similarly, it had every right to establish friendly relations with France and to import arms from anywhere.

•	The Burmese Government was unable to put up effective resistance to the British forces. The King was incompetent, unpopular, and unprepared for war.

•	The country was divided by court intrigues. A condition of near civil war prevailed. King Thibaw surrendered on 28 November 1885 and his dominions were annexed to the Indian Empire soon after.

Freedom Struggle of Burma
•	After the First World War, a vigorous modern nationalist movement arose in Burma. A wide campaign of boycotting British goods and administration was organized and the demand for Home Rule was put forward.

•	The Burmese nationalists soon joined hands with the Indian National Congress.

•	In 1935, the British separated Burma from India in the hope of weakening the Burmese struggle for freedom. The Burmese nationalists opposed this step.

•	The Burmese nationalist movement reached new heights under the leadership of U Aung San during the Second World War. And, finally, Burma won its independence on 4 January 1948.
 











•	The British Indian Government fought two wars with Afghanistan before its relations with the Government of Afghanistan were stabilized.

•	During the 19th century, the problem of Indo-Afghan relations got inextricably mixed up with the Anglo-Russian rivalry. Britain was expanding colonial power in West, South, and East Asia, Russia was an expanding power in Central Asia and desired to extend its territorial control in West and East Asia.

•	The two imperialisms openly clashed all over Asia. In fact, in 1855, Britain in alliance with France and Turkey, fought a war with Russia, known as the Crimean War.

•	Throughout the 19th century, the British rulers of India feared that Russia would launch an attack on India through Afghanistan and the North Western frontier of India. They, therefore, wanted to keep Russia at a safe distance from the Indian frontier.

•	Afghanistan was placed in a crucial position geographically from the British point of view. It could serve as an advanced post outside India’s frontiers for checking Russia's potential military threat as well as for promoting British commercial interests in Central Asia.
 

•	The British policy towards Afghanistan entered an active phase in 1835 when the Whigs came to power in Britain and Lord Palmerston became the Foreign Secretary.

•	Afghan politics had been unstable since the early years of the 19th century. Dost Muhammad Khan(the ruler of Afghanistan) had brought about partial stability, but was constantly threatened by internal and external enemies such as:

o	In the North, Dost Muhammad faced internal revolts and the potential Russian danger;

o	In the South, one of his brothers challenged his power at Kandahar;

o	In the East, Maharaja Ranjit Singh had occupied Peshawar and beyond him lay the English; and

o	In the West, enemies were at Herat and the Persian threat.

•	Dost Muhammad Khan was therefore in dire need of powerful friends. And, since he had a high regard for English strength, he desired some sort of an alliance with the Government of India.

•	The Russians tried to convince Dost Mohammad Khan, but he refused to comply. While discouraging the Russian envoy, he adopted a friendly attitude towards the British envoy, Captain Burns. But he failed to get adequate terms from the British who would not offer anything more than a verbal sympathy.
 

•	The British wanted to weaken and end Russian influence in Afghanistan, but they did not want a strong Afghanistan. They wanted to keep her a weak and divided country which they could easily control.

•	Lord Auckland, the Indian Governor-General, offered Dost Muhammed an alliance based on the subsidiary system.

•	Dost Muhammed wanted to be an ally of the British Indian Government on the basis of complete equality and not as one of its puppets or subsidiary allies.

•	Having tried his best to acquire British friendship, but failed, Dost Muhammad reluctantly turned towards Russia.

The First Afghan War
•	Auckland now decided to replace Dost Mohammed with a friendly i.e. subordinate ruler. His gaze fell on Shah Shuja, who had been deposed from the Afghan throne in 1809 and since then living at Ludhiana as a British pensioner.

•	On 26 June 1838, the Indian Government, Maharaja Ranjit Singh, and Shah Shuja signed a treaty at Lahore (three allies) by which the first two promised to help Shah Shuja capture power in Afghanistan and, in return, Shah Shuja promised not to enter into negotiations with any foreign state without the consent of the British and the Punjab Governments.

•	The three allies launched an attack on Afghanistan in February 1839. But Ranjit Singh cleverly hung back and never went beyond Peshawar. The British forces had not only to take the lead but to do all weary fighting.

•	Most of the Afghan tribes had already been won over with bribes. Kabul fell to the English on 7 August 1839, and Shah Shuja was immediately placed on the throne.

•	Shah Shuja was detested and despised by the people of Afghanistan, especially as he had come back with the help of foreign bayonets.

•	The Afghani people resented British interference in their administration. Gradually, the patriotic, freedom-loving Afghans began to rise up in anger and Dost Muhammed and his supporters began to harass the British army.

•	Dost Muhammed was captured in November 1840 and sent to India as a prisoner. But popular anger went on increasing and more and more Afghan tribes rose in revolt.
 


 

•	Then suddenly, on 2 November 1841, art uprising broke out at Kabul and the sturdy Afghans fell upon the British forces.

•	On 11 December 1841, the British were compelled to sign a treaty with the Afghan chiefs by which they agreed to evacuate Afghanistan and to restore Dost Mohammed.

•	As the British forces withdrew, the Afghan were attacked all along the way. Out of 16,000 men, only one reached the frontier alive, while a few others survived as prisoners.

•	The entire Afghan adventure ended as total failure. It had proved as one of the greatest disasters suffered by the British arms in India.

•	The British Indian Government now organized a new expedition. Kabul was reoccupied on 16 September 1842.

•	But it had learnt its lesson well, having avenged its recent defeat and humiliation, it arrived at a settlement with Dost Mohammed by which the British evacuated Kabul and recognized him as the independent ruler of Afghanistan.

•	Afghan War cost India over one and a half crores of rupees and its army, about 20,000 men.
 

Policy of Non-Interference
•	A new period of Anglo-Afghan friendship was inaugurated in 1855 with the signing of a treaty of friendship between Dost Mohammed and the Government of India.

•	The two governments promised to maintain friendly and peaceful relation, to respect each other's territories, and to abstain from interfering in each other's internal affairs.

•	Dost Mohammed also agreed that he would be "the friend of the friends of the East India Company and the enemy of its enemies." He remained loyal to this treaty during the Revolt of 1857 and refused to give help to the rebels.

•	After 1964, the policy of non-interference was vigorously pursued by Lord Lawrence and his two successors. As Russia again turned its attention to Central Asia after its defeat in the Crimean War; however, the British followed the policy of strengthening Afghanistan as a powerful buffer.

•	The British gave the Amir of Kabul aid and assistance to help him discipline his rivals internally and maintain his independence from foreign enemies. Thus, by a policy of non-interference and occasional help, the Amir was prevented from aligning himself with Russia.

Second Afghan War
•	The policy of non-interference did not, however, last very long. From 1870 onwards, there was a resurgence of imperialism all over the world. The Anglo-Russian rivalry was also intensified.

•	The British Government was again keen on the commercial and financial penetration of Central Asia.

•	Anglo-Russian ambitions clashed ever, more openly in the Balkans and West Asia.

•	The British statesmen once again thought of bringing Afghanistan under direct political control so that it could serve as a base for British expansion in Central Asia.

•	The Indian Government was directed by London to make Afghanistan a subsidiary state whose foreign and defence policies would be definitely under British control.

•	Sher Ali, the Afghan ruler or Amir, was fully conscious of the Russian danger to his independence and he was, therefore, quite willing to cooperate with the British in eliminating any threat from the North.
 



•	Sher Ali offered the Government of India a defensive and offensive alliance against Russia and asked it for promise of extensive military aid in case of need against internal or foreign enemies.

•	The Indian Government refused to enter into any such reciprocal and unconditional commitment. It demanded instead the unilateral right to keep a British mission at Kabul and to exercise control over Afghanistan's foreign relations.

•	When Sher Ali refused to comply, he was declared to be anti-British and pro-Russian in his sympathies.

•	Lord Lytton, who had come to India as Governor-General in 1876, openly declared: "A tool in the hands of Russia, I will never allow him to become. Such a tool it would be my duty to break before it could be used."

•	Lytton proposed to effect "the gradual disintegration and weakening of the Afghan power."

•	To force British terms on the Amir, a new attack on Afghanistan was launched in 1878. Peace came in May 1879 when Sher Ali's son, Yakub Khan, signed the Treaty of Gandamak by which the British secured all they had desired.

•	They secured certain border districts, the right to keep a Resident at Kabul, and control over Afghanistan's foreign policy.

•	The British success was short lived. The national pride of the Afghans had been hurt and once again they rose to defend their independence.

•	On 3 September 1879, the British Resident, Major Cavagnari, and his military escort were attacked and killed by rebellious Afghan troops. Afghanistan was again Invaded and occupied.
 


 

•	A change of government took place in Britain in 1880 and Lytton was replaced by a new Viceroy, Lord Ripon.

•	Ripon rapidly reversed Lytton's aggressive policy and went back to the policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of a strong and friendly Afghanistan.

•	Ripon recognized Abdur Rahman a grandson of Dost Mohammed, as the new ruler of Afghanistan.

•	The demand for the maintenance of a British Resident in Afghanistan was withdrawn in return, Abdur Rahman agreed not to maintain political relations with any power except the British.

•	The Government of India also agreed to pay Amir an annual subsidy and to come to his support in case of foreign aggression.

•	Amir of Afghanistan lost control of his foreign policy and, to that extent became a dependent ruler.

Third Anglo-Afghan War
•	The First World War and the Russian Revolution of 1917 created a new situation in Anglo-Afghan relations.

•	The war gave rise to strong anti-British feeling in Muslim countries, and the Russian Revolution inspired new anti-imperialist sentiments in Afghanistan as, in fact, all over the world.
 

•	The disappearance of Imperial Russia, moreover, removed the perpetual fear of aggression from the northern neighbor, which had compelled successive Afghan rulers to look to the British for support.

•	The Afghans now demanded full Independence from British control. Habibullah, who had succeeded Abdul Rahman in 1901 as Amir, was assassinated on 20 February 1919 and his son Amanullah, the new Amir, declared open war on British India.

•	Peace came in 1921 by a treaty, Afghanistan recovered its independence in foreign affairs.
 











•	Tibet lies to the north of India where the Himalayan peaks separate it from India. It was ruled by a Buddhist religious aristocracy (the Lamas) who had reduced the local population to serfdom and even slavery.

•	The chief political authority was exercised by the Dalai Lama, who claimed to be the living incarnation of the power of the Buddha.

•	The lamas wanted to isolate Tibet from the rest of the world; however, since the beginning of the 17th century, Tibet had recognized the nominal suzerainty of the Chinese Empire.

•	The Chinese Government also discouraged contacts with India though a limited trade and some pilgrim traffic between India and Tibet existed.

•	The Chinese Empire under the Manchu monarchy entered a period of decline during the 19th century. Gradually, Britain, France, Russia, Germany, Japan, and the United States of America penetrated China commercially and politically and established indirect political control over the Manchus.

•	The Chinese people also created a powerful anti-Manchu and anti-imperialist nationalist movement at the end of the 19th century and the Manchus were overthrown 'in 1911.

•	But the nationalists led by Dr. Sun Yat Sen failed to consolidate their power and China was torn by civil war during the next few years.

•	The result was that, China, since the middle of the 19th century, was in no position to assert even nominal control over Tibet. The Tibetan authorities still acknowledged in theory Chinese over lordship so that other foreign powers would not feel tempted to penetrate Tibet. But Tibet was not able to maintain its complete isolation for long.

•	Both Britain and Russia were keen to promote relations with Tibet. The British policy towards Tibet was governed by both economic and political considerations.

•	Economically, the British wanted to develop lndo-Tibetan trade and to exploit its rich mineral resources.

•	Politically, the British wanted to safeguard the northern frontier of India. But up to the end of the 19th century, the Tibetan authorities blocked all British efforts to penetrate it.
 



•	At this time, Russian ambitions also turned towards Tibet. Russian influence in Tibet was on the increase, this the British Government would not tolerate.

•	The Government of India, under Load Curzon, a vigorous empire builder, decided to take immediate action to counter Russian moves and to bring Tibet under its system of protected Border States.

•	According to some historians, the Russian danger was not real and was merely used as an excuse by Curzon to intervene in Tibet.

•	In March 1904, Curzon dispatched a military expedition to Lhasa, the Capital of Tibet, under Francis Younghusband.

•	The virtually unarmed Tibetans, who lacked modern weapons, fought back bravely but without success.

•	In August 1904, the expedition reached Lhasa without coming across any Russians on the way. A treaty was signed after prolonged negotiations.

•	Tibet had to pay Rs. 25 lakhs as indemnity; the Chumbi valley was to be occupied by the British for three years; a British trade mission was to be stationed at Gyantse.

•	The British agreed not to interfere in Tibet's internal affairs. On their part, the Tibetans agreed not to admit the representatives of any foreign power into Tibet.
 



•	The British achieved very little by the Tibetan expedition. It secured Russia's withdrawal from Tibet, but at the cost of confirming Chinese suzerainty.
 











•	The state of Sikkim lies to the north of Bengal, adjacent to Nepal and at the border between Tibet and India (as shown in the map given below – highlighted with red line).

•	In 1835, the Raja of Sikkim ceded to the British territory around Darjeeling in return for an annual money grant.

•	Friendly relations between the British and Raja (of Sikkim) were disturbed in 1849 when a minor quarrel led Dalhousie to send troops into Sikkim whose ruler was in the end forced to cede nearly 1700 square miles of his territory to British India.

•	In 1860, the second clash occurred when the British were engaged by the troops of the Diwan of Sikkim.

•	By the peace treaty signed in 1861, Sikkim was reduced to the status of a virtual protectorate.

•	The Raja of Sikkim expelled the Diwan and his relations from Sikkim, agreed to pay a fine of Rs. 7,000 as well as full compensation for British losses in the war, opened his country fully to British trade, and agreed to limit the transit duty on goods exchanged between India and Tibet via Sikkim.

•	In 1886, fresh trouble arose when the Tibetans tried to bring Sikkim under their control with the complicity of its rulers who were pro-Tibet. But the Government of India would not let this happen.
 
Indian History



•	It looked upon Sikkim as an essential buffer for the security of India's northern frontier, particularly of Darjeeling and its tea-gardens. The British, therefore, carried out military operations against the Tibetans in Sikkim during 1888.

•	A settlement came in 1890 with the signing of an Anglo-Chinese agreement. The treaty recognized that Sikkim was a British protectorate over whose internal administration and foreign relations, the Government of India had the right to exercise exclusive control.
 


•	Bhutan is a large hilly country to the East of Sikkim and at India's northern border (as shown in the map given below – highlighted with red line).

•	Warren Hastings established friendly relations with the ruler of Bhutan after 1774 when Bhutan permitted Bengal to trade with Tibet through its territory.

•	Relations between the Government of India and Bhutan became unsatisfactory after 1815. The British now began to cast greedy eyes upon the narrow strip or territory of about 1,000 square miles at the base of Bhutan hills containing a number of duars or passes.

•	This area would give India a well-defined and defendable border and useful tea-lands to the British planters.

•	In 1841, Lord Auckland annexed the Assam duars.

•	The relations between India and Bhutan were further strained by the intermittent raids made by the Bhutiyas (tribal group) on the Bengal side of the border.

•	In 1865, a brief war broke out between the British and Bhutan. The fighting was utterly one-sided and was settled by a treaty signed in November 1865.
 


•	There was hardly any aspect of the Indian economy that was not changed for better or for worse during the entire period of British rule down to 1947.

Disruption of Traditional Economy
•	The economic policies followed by the British led to the rapid transformation of Indian’s economy into a colonial economy whose nature and structure were determined by the needs of the British economy that totally disrupted the traditional structure of the Indian economy.

Ruin of Artisans and Craftsmen
•	There was a sudden and quick collapse of the urban handicrafts, which had for centuries made India’s name a byword in the markets of the entire civilized world.

•	Indian goods made with primitive techniques could not compete with goods produced on a mass scale by powerful steam-operated machines.

•	The development of railways enabled British manufactures to reach and uproot the traditional industries in the remotest villages of the country.

•	The gradual destruction of rural crafts broke up the union between agricultural and domestic industry in the countryside and thus contributed to the destruction of the self-sufficient village economy.

•	In the very beginning of British rule in Bengal, the policy of Clive and Warren Hastings of extracting the largest possible land revenue had led to such devastation that even Cornwallis complained that one-third of Bengal had been transformed into “a jungle inhabited only by wild beasts.”

•	Over a period of time, the British rule introduced the concept of transferability of land; likewise, the British revenue system enabled the money-lender or the rich peasant to take possession of land.

•	The process of transfer of land from cultivators was intensified during periods of scarcity and famines.

•	By the end of the 19th century, the money-lender had become a major curse of the countryside and an important cause of the growing poverty of the rural people.
 

•	In 1911, the total rural debt was estimated at Rs 300 crores and by 1937, it was 1,800 crores.

•	The pressure of taxation and growing poverty pushed the cultivators into debt, which in turn increased their poverty.

•	The growing commercialization of agriculture also helped the money-lender- cum-merchant to exploit the cultivator.

•	The Permanent Settlement in North Madras and the Ryotwari Settlement in the rest of Madras were equally harsh.

Stagnation and Deterioration of Agriculture
•	Following were the major reasons for stagnation and deterioration of agriculture:

o	Overcrowding of agriculture;

o	Excessive land revenue demand;

o	Growth of landlordism;

o	Increasing indebtedness; and

o	The growing impoverishment of the cultivators.

•	Indigo manufacture was introduced in India at the end of the 18th century and flourished in Bengal and Bihar.

•	Indigo planters gained notoriety for their oppression over the peasants who were compelled by them to cultivate indigo. This oppression was vividly portrayed by the famous Bengali writer Dinbandhu Mitra in his play “Neel Darpan” in 1860.
 


 

•	The invention of a synthetic dye gave a big blow to the indigo industry and it gradually declined.

Poverty and Famines
•	The poverty of the people found its culmination in a series of famines which ravaged all parts of India in the second half of the 19th century.

•	The first of these famines occurred in Western U.P. in 1860-61 and cost over 2 lakh lives.

•	In 1865-66, a famine engulfed Orissa, Bengal, Bihar, and Madras and took a toll of nearly 20 lakh lives; Orissa alone lost 10 lakh people.

•	Perhaps the worst famine in Indian history till then occurred in 1876-78 in Madras, Mysore, Hyderabad, Maharashtra, Western U. P., and Punjab.
 


 

•	Madras lost nearly 35 lakhs,

•	Maharashtra lost 8 lakh people,

•	Mysore lost nearly 20 per cent of its population, and

•	U. P. lost over 12 lakhs.

•	The famine of 1896-97 affected over 9.5 crore people of whom nearly 45 lakhs died. The famine of 1899-1900 followed quickly and caused widespread distress.

•	In spite of official efforts to save lives through the provision of famine relief, over 25 lakh people died.

•	Apart from these major famines, many other local famines and scarcities occurred. William Digby, a British writer, has calculated that, in all, over 28,825,000 people died during famines from 1854 to 1901.

•	Another famine in 1943 carried away nearly 3 million people in Bengal.

•	These famines and the high losses of life in them indicate the extent to which poverty and starvation had taken root in India.
 











•	The second half of the 19th century witnessed the full flowering of the national political consciousness and the growth of an organized national movement in India.

•	In December 1885, the Indian National Congress was established under whose leadership, Indians waged a prolonged and courageous struggle for independence from foreign rule, which India finally won on 15 August 1947.

Consequence of Foreign Domination
•	The modem Indian nationalism arose to meet the challenges of foreign domination.

•	It was British rule and its direct and indirect consequences, which provided the material, moral, and intellectual conditions for the development of a national movement in India.

•	The Indians realized gradually that their interests were being sacrificed to those of Lancashire manufacturers and other dominant British interests.

•	The foundations of the Indian nationalist movement lay in the fact that increasingly British rule became the major cause of India's economic backwardness. It became the major barrier to India's further economic, social, cultural, intellectual, and political development.

•	The peasants saw that the Government took away a large part of his produce as land revenue; that the Government and its machinery – the police, the courts, the officials – favored and protected the zamindars and landlords, who rack-rented them, and the merchants and money- lenders, who cheated and exploited him in diverse way and who took away their land.

•	The artisans or handicraftsmen saw that the foreign regime had helped foreign competition to ruin them and had done nothing to rehabilitate them.

•	All these three classes of Indian society—the peasants, the artisans, and the workers, constituting the overwhelming majority of Indian population — discovered that they had no political rights or powers, and that virtually nothing was being done for their intellectual or cultural improvement.

•	Education did not percolate down to them. There were hardly any schools in villages and the few that were there were poorly run.
 

•	Economic exploitation by Britain was swelling India’s poverty. They began to complain of the extreme costliness of the Indian administration, of the excessive burden of taxation especially on the peasantry, of the destruction of India's indigenous industries, of official attempts to check the growth of modern industries through a pro-British tariff policy, of the neglect of nation- building and welfare activities such as education, irrigation, sanitation, and health services.

•	The Indian intelligentsia suffered from growing unemployment. The few Indians who were educated were not able to find employment and even those who did find jobs discovered that most of the better paid jobs were reserved for the English middle and upper classes, who looked upon India as a special pasture for their sons.

•	The educated Indians found that the economic and cultural development of the country and its freedom from foreign control alone could provide them with better employment opportunities.

•	Instead, the Government and its bureaucracy favored foreign capitalists who came to India with their vast resources and appropriated the limited industrial field.

•	The Indian capitalists were particularly opposed to the strong competition from foreign capitalists. In the 1940's, many of the Indian industrialists demanded that "all British investments in India be repatriated."

•	In 1945, M.A. Master, President of the Indian Merchants' Chamber warned: "India would prefer to go without industrial development rather than allow the creation of new East India Companies in this country, which would not only militate against her economic independence, but would also effectively prevent her from acquiring her political freedom."

•	The Indian capitalists, therefore, realized that there existed a contradiction between imperialism and their own independent growth, and that only a national government would create conditions for the rapid development of Indian trade and industries.

Administrative & Economic Unification of India
•	The British had gradually introduced a uniform and modern system of government throughout the country and thus unified it administratively.

•	The destruction of the rural and local self-sufficient economy and the introduction of modern trade and industries on an all-India scale had increasingly made India's economic life a single whole and inter-linked the economic fate of people living in different parts of the country. For example, if famine or scarcity occurred in one part of India, prices and availability of foodstuffs were affected in all other parts of the country.
 



•	Introduction of the railways, telegraphs, and a unified postal system had brought the different parts of the country together and promoted mutual contact among the people, especially among the leaders.

•	The anti-imperialist feeling was itself a factor in the unification of the country and the emergence of a common national outlook.

Western Thought and Education
•	As a result of the spread of modern western education and thought during the 19th century, a large number of Indians imbibed a modern rational, secular, democratic, and nationalist political outlook.

•	The Indians began to study, admire, and emulate the contemporary nationalist movements of the European nations. Rousseau, Paine, John Stuart Mill, and other western thinkers became their political guides, while Martini, Garibaldi, and Irish nationalist leaders became their political heroes.

•	The educated Indians were the first to feel the humiliation of foreign subjection. By becoming modern in their thinking, they also acquired the ability to study the evil effects of the foreign rule. They were inspired by the dream of a modern, strong, prosperous, and united India. In a course of time, the best among them became the leaders and organizers of the national movement.

•	In fact, in the schools and colleges, the authorities tried to inculcate notions of docility and servility to foreign rule. Nationalist ideas were a part of the general spread of modern ideas.

•	Modern education also created a certain uniformity and community of outlook and interests among the educated Indians. The English language played an important role in this respect. It became the medium for the spread of modern ideas. It also became the medium of communication and exchange of idea, between educated Indians from different linguistic regions of the country.

•	Political leaders like Dadabhai Naoroji, Sayyid Ahmed Khan, Justice Ranade, Tilak, and Gandhiji agitated for a bigger role for the Indian languages in the educational system.

Role of the Press and Literature
•	The chief instrument through which the nationalist-minded Indians spread the message of patriotism and modern economic, social, and political ideas and created an all-India consciousness was the press.

•	In their columns, the official policies were constantly criticized; the Indian point of view was put forward; the people were asked to unite and work for national
 

welfare; and ideas of self-government, democracy, industrialization, etc., were popularized among the people.

•	Some of the prominent nationalist newspapers of the period were the Hindu Patriot, the Amrita Bazar Patrika, the Indian Mirror, the Bengalee, the Som Prakash and the Sanjivani in Bengal; the Rast Goftar, the Native Opinion, the Indu Prakash, the Mahratta, and the Kesari (in Bombay); the Hindu, the Swadesamitran, the Andhra Prakasika, and the Kerala Patrika (in Madras); the Advocate, the Hindustani, and the Azad (in U. P.); and the Tribune, the Akhbar- I-Am, and the Koh-i-Noor (in Punjab).

•	National literature in the form of novels, essays, and patriotic poetry also played an important role in arousing the national consciousness.

•	Bankim Chandra Chatterjee and Rabindranath Tagore in Bengali, Lakshminath Bezbarua in Assamese; Vishnu Shastri Chiplunkar in Marathi, Subramanya Bharati in Tamil; Bharatendu Harishchandra in Hindi; and Altaf Husain Hah in Urdu were some of the prominent nationalist writers of the period.

Rediscovery of India's Past
•	Many Indians had fallen so low as to have lost confidence in their own capacity for self-government.

•	Many British officials and writers of the time constantly advanced the thesis that Indians had never been able to rule themselves in the past that Hindus and Muslims had always fought one another, that Indians were destined to be ruled by foreigners, that their religion and social life were degraded and uncivilized making them unfit for democracy or even self-government.

•	Many of the nationalist leaders tried to arouse the self-confidence and self- respect of the people by countering this propaganda. They pointed to the cultural heritage of India with pride and referred the critics to the political achievements of rulers like Asoka, Chandragupta Vikramaditya, and Akbar.

•	Unfortunately, some of the nationalists went to the other extreme and began to glorify India's past uncritically ignoring its weakness and backwardness. Great harm was done, in particular, by the tendency to look up only to the heritage of ancient India while ignoring the equally great achievements of the medieval period.

•	The ignorance of medieval period encouraged the growth of communal sentiments among the Hindus and the counter tendency among the Muslims of looking to the history of the Arabs and the Turks for cultural and historical inspiration.
 

•	In meeting the challenge of cultural imperialism of the West, many Indians tended to ignore the fact that in many respects, the people of India were culturally backward.

•	A false sense of pride and smugness was produced, which tended to prevail Indians from looking critically at their society.

•	The growth of communal sentiments weakened the struggle against social and cultural backwardness, and led many Indians to turn away from healthy and fresh tendencies and ideas from other people.

Racial Arrogance of Rulers
•	An important factor in the growth of national sentiments in India was the tone of racial superiority adopted by many Englishmen while dealing with Indians.

•	Many Englishmen openly insulted even educated Indians. A particularly odious and frequent form taken by racial arrogance was the failure of justice whenever an Englishman was involved in a dispute with an Indian.

•	The Indian newspapers often published instances in which an Englishmen had hit and killed an Indian but escaped very lightly. This was not only because of conscious partiality by the judges and administrators but even more because of racial prejudice.

•	Racial arrogance branded all Indians irrespective of their caste, religion, province, or class with the badge of inferiority.

•	The Indians were kept out of exclusively European clubs and were often not permitted to travel in the same compartment in a train with the European passengers. This made them conscious of national humiliation.

Immediate Factors
•	By the 1870's, it was evident that Indian nationalism had gathered enough strength and momentum to appear as a major force on the Indian political scene. However, it required the reactionary regime of Lord Lytton to give it visible form and the controversy around the Ilbert Bill gave it an organized form.

•	During Lytton's viceroyalty from 1876-80, most of the import duties on British textile imports were removed to please the textile manufacturers of Britain. This action was interpreted by Indians as proof of the British desire to ruin the small but growing textile industry of India. It created a wave of anger in the country and led to widespread nationalist agitation.

•	The Second War against Afghanistan aroused vehement agitation against the heavy cost of this imperialist war, which the Indian Treasury was made to bear.
 



•	The Arms Act of 1878, which disarmed the people, appeared to them as an effort to emasculate the entire nation.

•	The Vernacular Press Act of 1878 was condemned by the politically conscious Indians as an attempt to suppress the growing nationalist criticism of the alien government.

•	The holding of the imperial Durbar at Delhi in 1877 at a time when the country was suffering from a terrible famine led people to believe that their rulers cared very little even for their lives.

•	In 1878, the government announced new regulations reducing the maximum age limit for sitting in the Indian Civil Service Examination from 21 years to 19.

•	Already Indian students had found it difficult to compete with English boys since the examination was conducted in England and through English medium. The new regulations further reduced their chances of entering the Civil Service.

•	The Indians now realized that the British had no intention of relaxing their near-total monopoly of the higher grades of services in the administration.

•	Lytton’s viceroyalty helped to intensify discontent against foreign rule.

•	In 1883, Ripon who succeeded Lytton as the Viceroy, tried to pass a law to enable Indian district magistrates and session judges to trial Europeans in criminal cases.

•	Under the existing law, even Indian members of the Indian Civil Service were not authorized to try Europeans in their courts.

•	The Europeans in India organized a vehement agitation against this Bill, which came to be known as Ilbert Bill (after Ilbert, the Law Member).

•	The Ilbert Bill poured abuse on Indians and their culture and character. They declared that even the most highly educated among the Indians were unfit to trial a European.
 











•	The Indian National Congress (INC), founded in December 1885, was the first organized expression of the Indian National Movement on an all-India scale. It had, however, many predecessors.

Major Public Associations
•	Following are the important public associations, established before the Indian National Congress:

o	The Landholders' Society — founded in 1837, it was an association of the landlords of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa. Its purpose was to promote the class interests of the landlords.

o	The Bengal British Indian Society – founded in 1843, it was organized to protect and promote general public interests.

o	In 1851, the Landholders’ Society and the Bengal British Indian Society merged to form the British India Association.

o	The Madras Native Association and the Bombay Association were established in 1852.

o	The Scientific Society founded by Sayyid Ahmad Khan, were established in different towns of the country.

•	All the above-discussed associations were dominated by wealthy and aristocratic elements — called in those days’ prominent persons and were provincial or local in character.

•	The members of public associations worked for reform of administration, association of Indians with the administration, and spread of education, and sent long petitions, putting forward Indian demands, to the British Parliament.

•	In 1866, Dadabhai Naoroji organized the East India Association in London to discuss the Indian question and to influence British public men to promote Indian welfare. Later he organized branches of the Association in prominent Indian cities.
 


 
•	Born in 1825, Dadabhai Naoroji devoted his entire life to the national movement and soon came to be known as the ‘Grand Old Man of India.’

•	Dadabhai Naoroji was the first economic thinker of India. In his writings on economics, he showed that the basic cause of India’s poverty lay in the British exploitation of India and the drain of its wealth.

•	Dadabhai was honored by being thrice elected president of the Indian National Congress.

Surendranath Banerjea
•	Surendranath Banerjea was a brilliant writer and orator. He was unjustly turned out of the Indian Civil Service as his superiors could not tolerate the presence of an independent-minded Indian in the ranks of this service.
 


 
•	Banerjea began his public career in 1875 by delivering brilliant addresses on nationalist topics to the students of Calcutta.

•	Led by Surendranath and Anandamohan Bose, the younger nationalists of Bengal founded the Indian Association in July 1876.

•	The Indian Association set before itself the aims of creating a strong public opinion in the country on political questions and the unification of the Indian people on a common political program.

•	In order to attract large numbers of people to its banner, the Indian Association fixed a low membership fee for the poorer classes.

•	The first major issue that the Indian Association took up for agitation was the reform of the Civil Service regulations and the raising of the age limit for its examination.

•	Surendranath Banerjea toured different parts of the country during 1877-78 in an effort to create an all-India public opinion on this question.

•	The Indian Association also carried out agitation against the Arms Act and the Vernacular Press Act and in favor of protection of the tenants from oppression by the reminders.

•	During 1883-85, the Indian Association organized popular demonstrations of thousands of peasants to get the Rent Bill changed in favor of the tenants.
 



•	The Indian Association agitated for better conditions of work for the workers in the English-owned tea plantations.

•	Many branches of the Indian Association were opened in the towns and villages of Bengal and also in many towns outside Bengal.

•	Some other Important Public Associations were:

o	Justice Ranade and others organized the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha in the 1870's.

o	The Madras Mahajan Sabha was started in 1881 and the Bombay Presidency Association in 1885.

o	The most important of the pre-Congress nationalist organizations was the
Indian Association of Calcutta.

•	The Poona Sarvajanik Sabha brought out a quarterly journal under the guidance of Justice Ranade. This journal became the intellectual guide of new India, particularly on economic questions.

•	These organizations were mainly devoted to criticism of important administrative and legislative measures.
 











•	A. O. Hume, a retired English Civil Servant along with prominent Indian leaders founded all-India organization namely the “Indian National Congress.”

•	The first session of the Indian National Congress was held at Bombay in December 1885. It was presided by W. C. Bonnerjee and attended by 72 delegates.
 

Aims of INC

•	The aims of the National Congress were declared to be:

o	Promotion of friendly relations among nationalist political workers residing in different parts of the country;

o	Development and consolidation of the feeling of national unity irrespective of caste, religion, or province;

o	Formulation of popular demands and their presentation before the Government; and

o	Training and organization of public opinion in the country.

•	One of the main aims of Hume in helping to found the National Congress was to provide an outlet i.e. 'a safety valve'—to the increasing popular discontent against British rule.

•	In 1879, Wasudeo Balwant Phadke, a clerk in the commissariat department, had gathered a band of Ramoshi peasants and started an armed uprising in Maharashtra. Though this crude and an ill-prepared attempt was easily crushed, it was a portent of events to come.

•	Hume as well as other English officials and statesmen were afraid that the educated Indians might provide leadership to the masses and organize a powerful rebellion against the foreign government. As Hume put it: "A safety valve for the escape of great and growing forces generated by our own action was urgently needed."

•	Hume believed that the National Congress would provide a peaceful and constitutional outlet to the discontent among the educated Indians and would thus help to avoid the outbreak of a popular revolt.

•	The National Congress represented the urge of the politically conscious Indians to set up a national organization to work for their political and economic advancement.

•	In any case, the Indian leaders, who cooperated with Hume in starting this National Congress, were patriotic men of high character who willingly accepted Hume's help as they did not want to arouse official hostility towards their efforts at so early stage of political activity.

•	Surendranath Banerjea and many other leaders of Bengal had not attended the first session of the National Congress as they were busy with the Second National Conference at Calcutta.
 



•	In 1886, Surendranath Banerjea and other leaders of Bengal merged their forces with those of the National Congress whose second session met in Calcutta in December 1886 under the president-ship of Dadabhai Naoroji.

•	From the Calcutta session, the National Congress became 'the whole country's Congress'. Its delegates, numbering 436, were elected by different local organizations and groups.

•	The National Congress met every year in December, in a different part of the country.

•	The number of its delegates soon increased to thousands. Its delegates consisted mostly of lawyers, journalists, traders, industrialists, teachers, and landlords.

•	In 1890, Kadambini Ganguli, the first woman graduate of Calcutta University addressed the Congress session.

•	This was symbolic of the fact that India's straggle for freedom would raise Indian women from the degraded position to which they had been reduced for centuries past.

•	Some of the great presidents of the National Congress during its early years were Dadabhai Naoroji, Badruddin Tyabji, Pherozeshah Mehta, P. Ananda Charlu, Surendranath Banerjea, Ramesh Chandra Dutt, Ananda Mohan Bose, and Gopal Krishna Gokhale.
 











•	Reforms after the Indian National Congress can be studied under the following heads:

o	Constitutional Reforms

o	Economic Reforms

o	Administrative Reforms

o	Methods of Political Work
Let’s discuss each one of them separately in brief:

Constitutional Reforms
•	From 1885 to 1892, the nationalist leaders demanded the expansion and reform of the Legislative Councils. They demanded membership of the councils for elected representatives of the people and also an increase in the powers of the councils.

•	The British Government was forced by their agitation to pass the Indian Councils Act of 1892. By this Act, the number of members of the Imperial Legislative Council as well as of the provincial councils was increased.

•	Some of the members of Councils could be elected indirectly by Indians, but the officials' majority remained as it is.

•	The Councils were also given the right to discuss the annual budgets though they could not vote on them.

•	The nationalists were totally dissatisfied with the Act of 1892 and declared it to be a hoax. They demanded a larger share for Indians in the councils as also wider powers for them. In particular, they demanded Indian control over the public purse and raised the slogan that had earlier become the national cry of the American people during their War of Independence: 'No taxation without representation.’

•	By the beginning of the 20th century, the nationalist leaders advanced further and put forward the claim for Swarajya or self-government within the British Empire on the model of self-governing colonies like Australia and Canada.

•	This demand was made from the Congress platform by Gokhale in 1905 and by Dadabhai Naoroji in 1906.
 

Economic Reforms
•	Dadabhai Naoroji declared as early as 1881 that British rule was "an everlasting, increasing, and every day increasing foreign invasion" that was "utterly, though gradually, destroying the country."

•	The nationalists blamed the British for the destruction of India's indigenous Industries. The chief remedy they suggested for the removal of India's poverty was the rapid development of modern industries.

•	The Indian people made a great effort to popularize the idea of swadeshi or the use of Indian goods and the boycott of British goods as a means of promoting Indian industries.

•	Students in Poona and in other towns of Maharashtra publicly burnt foreign clothes in 1896 as part of the larger swadeshi campaign.

•	Indians agitated for improvement in the work conditions of the plantation laborers.

•	The nationalists declared high taxation to be one of the causes of India's poverty and demanded abolition of the salt tax and reduction of land revenue.

•	The nationalists condemned the high military expenditure of the Government of India and demanded its reduction.

Administrative Reforms
•	The most important administrative reform the Indians desired at this time was Indianization of the higher grades of administrative services. They put forward this demand on economic, political, and moral grounds.

•	Economically, the European monopoly of the higher services was harmful on two grounds:

i.	Europeans were paid at very high rates and this made Indian administration very costly—Indians of similar qualifications could be employed on lower salaries; and

ii.	Europeans sent out of India a large part of their salaries and their pensions were paid in England. This added to the drain of wealth from India.

•	Politically, the nationalists hoped that the Indianization of these (civil) services would make the administration more responsive to Indian needs and hence, they:

o	Demanded separation of the judiciary from executive powers;
 



o	Opposed the curtailment of the powers of the juries;

o	Opposed the official policy of disarming the people;

o	Asked the government to trust the people and grant them the right to bear arms and thus defend themselves and their country in times of need;

o	Urged the government to undertake and develop welfare activities of the state;

o	Demanded greater facilities for technical and higher education;

o	Urged the development of agricultural banks to save the peasant from the clutches of the money-lender; and

o	Demanded extension of medical and health facilities and improvement of the police system to make it honest, efficient, and popular.

Methods of Political Work
•	The Indian national movement up to 1905 was dominated by leaders who have often been described as moderate nationalists or Moderates.

•	The political methods of the Moderates can be summed up briefly as constitutional agitation within the four walls of the law and slow orderly political progress.

•	Moderates believed that if public opinion was created and organized and popular demands presented to the authorities through petitions, meetings, resolutions, and speeches, the authorities would concede these demands gradually and step by step.

•	In 1889, the British Committee started a journal called ‘India.’

•	Dadabhai Naoroji spent a major part of his life and income in England in popularizing India’s case among England’s people.

•	Moderates genuinely believed that the continuation of India's political connection with Britain was in the interests of India at that stage of history. They, therefore, planned not to expel the British but to transform British rule to approximate to national rule.

•	Later, when Moderates took note of the evils of British rule and the failure of the government to accept nationalist demands for reform, many of them stopped talking of loyalty to British rule and started demanding self- government for India.
 



•	From the beginning, many nationalist leaders had no faith in the good intentions of the British. They believed in depending on political action by, and the strength of the Indian people themselves.

•	Tilak and numerous other leaders and newspaper editors represented the trend, that later came to be known as Extremists or radical nationalists.

Attitude of the Government
•	The British authorities were from the beginning hostile to the rising nationalist movement and had become suspicious of the National Congress.

•	The British officials branded the nationalist leaders as 'disloyal babus', 'seditious brahmins' and 'violent villains'.

•	As the British became apparent that the National Congress would not become a tool in the hands of the authorities, but rather it was gradually becoming a focus of Indian nationalism. British officials now began to criticize and condemn the National Congress and other Rationalist spokesmen openly.

•	In 1887, Dufferin attacked the National Congress in a public speech and ridiculed it as representing only 'a microscopic minority of the people.’

•	In 1900; Lord Curzon announced to the Secretary of State, that "the Congress is tottering to its fall, and one of my great ambitions, while in India, is to assist it to a peaceful demise".

•	The British authorities also pushed further the policy of ‘divide and rule.’ They encouraged Sayyid Ahmed Khan, Raja Shiva Prasad of Benaras, and other pro- British individuals to start an anti-Congress movement.

•	Some critics say that the nationalist movement and the National Congress did not achieve much success in their early phase; however, it established the political truth that India must be ruled in the interests of the Indians and made the issue of nationalism a dominant one in Indian life.
 











•	Many Indians realized that social and religious reformation was an essential condition for the all-round development of the country on modern lines and for the growth of national unity and solidarity.

•	After 1858, the earlier reforming tendency was broadened. The work of earlier reformers, like Raja Ram Mohan Roy and Pandit Vidyasagar, was carried further by major movements of religious and social reform.

Religious Reforms
•	Filled with the desire to adapt their society to the requirements of the modern world of science, democracy, and nationalism, and determined to let no obstacles stand in the way, thoughtful Indians set out to reform their traditional religions.

Brahmo Samaj
•	After 1843, the Brahmo tradition founded by Raja Ram Mohan Roy was carried forward by Devendranath Tagore and after 1866 by Keshub Chandra Sen.

•	Devendranath Tagore repudiated the doctrine that the Vedic scriptures were infallible.

•	The Brahmo Samaj made an effort to reform Hindu religion by removing abuses, by basing it on the worship of one God and on the teachings of the Vedas and Upanishads, and by incorporating the best aspects of modern western thought.

•	The Brahmo Samaj denied the need for a priestly class for interpreting religious writings. Every individual had the right and the capacity to decide with the help of his own intellect what was right and what was wrong in a religious book or principle.

•	The Brahmos were basically opposed to idolatry and superstitious practices and rituals, in fact, the entire Brahmanical system; they could worship one God without the mediation of the priest.

•	The Brahmos were also great social reformers. They actively opposed the caste system and child-marriage; and supported the general uplift of women, including widow remarriage, and the spread of modern education to men and women.
 

•	The Brahmo Samaj was weakened by internal dissentions in the second half of the 19th century.

Religious Reform in Maharashtra
•	Religious reform was begun in Bombay in 1840 by the Parmahans Mandali, Which aimed at fighting idolatry and the caste system.

•	The earliest religious reformer in Western India perhaps was Gopal Hari Deshmukh, known popularly as 'Lokahitwadi'. He wrote in Marathi, made powerful rationalist attacks on Hindu orthodoxy, and preached religious and social equality.

•	Later the Prarthana Samaj was started with the aim of reforming Hindu religious thought and practice in the light of modern knowledge.

•	It preached the worship of one God and tried to free religion of caste orthodoxy and priestly domination.

•	Two of its great leaders were R.G. Bhandarkar, the famous Sanskrit scholar and historian, and Mahadev Govind Ranade (1842-1901).

•	Prarthana Samaj was powerfully influenced by the Brahmo Samaj. Its activities also spread to South India as a result of the efforts of the Telugu reformer, Viresalingam.

Theosophical Society
•	The Theosophical Society was founded in the United States by Madam H.P. Blavatsky and Colonel H.S. Olcott, who later came to India and founded the headquarters of the Society at Adyar near Madras in 1886.

•	The Theosophist movement soon grew in India as a result of the leadership given to Mrs. Annie Besant who had come to India in 1893.
 


 

•	The Theosophists advocated the revival and strengthening of the ancient religion of Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, and Buddhism.

•	The Theosophists recognized the doctrine of the transmigration of the soul. They also preached the universal brotherhood of man.

•	It was a movement led by westerners who glorified Indian religions and philosophical tradition.

•	Theosophical movement helped Indians to recover their self-confidence, even though it tended to give them a sense of false pride in their past greatness.

•	One of Mrs. Besant's many achievements in India was the establishment of the Central Hindu School at Banaras which was later developed by Madan Mohan Malaviya into the Banaras Hindu University.

Religious Reform among Muslims
•	The Mohammedan Literary Society was founded at Calcutta in 1863. This Society promoted discussion of religious, social, and political questions in the light of modern ideas and encouraged upper and middle class Muslims to take to western education.
 

Religious Reform among Parsis
•	In 1851, the Rehnumai Mazdayasan Sabha or Religious Reform Association was started by Naoroji Furdonji, Dadabhai Naoroji, S.S. Bengalee, and others.

•	Religious Reform Association campaigned against the entrenched orthodoxy in the religious field and initiated the modernization of Parsi social customs regarding the education of women, marriage, and the social position of women in general.

Religious Reform among Sikhs
•	Religious reform among the Sikhs was begun at the end of the 19th century when the Khalsa College was started at Amritsar.

•	In 1920, the Akali Movement rose in Punjab. The main aim of the Akalis was to purify the management of the gurudwaras or Sikh shrines.

•	These gurudwaras had been heavily endowed with land and money by devout Sikhs. But they had come to be managed autocratically by corrupt and selfish mahants.

•	The Sikh masses led by the Akalis started in 1921 a powerful Satyagraha against the mahants and the Government which came to their aid.

•	The Akalis soon forced the Government to pass a new Sikh Gurudwaras Act in 1922, which was later amended in 1925.
 











•	Following are the significant religious reformers of modern India:

Ramakrishana and Vivekananda
•	Ramakrishna Parmhansa (1834-1886) was a saintly person who sought religious salvation in the traditional ways of renunciation, meditation, and devotion (bhakti).

•	Parmhansa, again and again, emphasized that there were many roads to God and salvation and that service of man was service of God, for man was the embodiment of God.

•	Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902), a disciple of Ramakrishan Parmhansa popularized his religious message and tried to put it in a form that would suit the needs of contemporary Indian society.

•	Swami Vivekananda said, “Knowledge unaccompanied by action in the actual world in which we lived was useless.”

•	In 1898, Swami Vivekananda wrote – “For our own motherland a junction of
the two great systems, Hinduism and Islam … is the only hope.”

•	Vivekananda condemned the caste system and the current Hindu emphasis on rituals, ceremonies, and superstitions, and urged the people to imbibe the spirit of liberty, equality, and free thinking.
 


 

•	To the educated Indians, Swami Vivekananda said, “So long as the millions live in hunger and ignorance, I hold everyman a traitor who having been educated at their expense, pays not the least heed to them.”

•	In 1896, Vivekananda founded the Ramakrishna Mission to carry on humanitarian relief and social work.

•	The Mission had many branches in different parts of the country and carried on social service by opening schools, hospitals, and dispensaries, orphanages, libraries, etc.

Swami Dayanand (Arya Samaj)
•	Arya Samaj was founded in 1875 by Swami Dayanand Saraswati (1824-1883).

•	Swami Dayanand believed that selfish and ignorant priests had perverted Hindu religion with the aid of the Puranas, which he said were full of false teachings.

•	Swami Dayanand rejected all later religious thought if it conflicted with the Vedas. His total dependence on the Vedas and their infallibility gave his teachings an orthodox coloring.

•	Swami Dayanand was opposed to idolatry, ritual, and priesthood and particularly to the prevalent caste practices and popular Hinduism as preached by brahmins.
 

•	Some of Swami Dayanand's followers later started a network of schools and colleges in the country to impart education on western lines; Lala Hansraj played a leading part in this effort.

•	On the other hand, in 1902, Swami Shradhananda started the Gurukul near Hardwar to propagate the most traditional ideals of education.

Sayyid Ahmad Khan (Aligarh School)
•	The Mohammedan Literary Society was founded at Calcutta in 1863. This Society promoted discussion of religious, social, and political questions in the light of modern ideas and encouraged upper and middle class Muslims to take to western education.

•	The most important reformer among the Muslims was Sayyid Ahmad Khan (1817-1898). He was tremendously impressed by modern scientific thought and worked all his life to reconcile it with Islam.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan, first of all, declared that the Quran alone was the authoritative work for Islam and all other Islamic writings were secondary.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan urged the people to develop a critical approach and freedom of thought. He said, "so long as freedom of thought is not developed, there can be no civilized life."
 



•	He also warned against fanaticism, narrow-mindedness, and exclusiveness, and urged students and others to be broadminded and tolerant. A closed mind, he said, was the hallmark of social and intellectual backwardness.

•	Therefore promotion of modern education remained his first task throughout his life. As an official, he founded schools in many towns and had many western books translated into Urdu.

•	In 1875, Sayyid Ahmad Khan founded the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh as a center for spreading western sciences and culture. Later, this College grew into the Aligarh Muslim University.

•	Sayyd Ahmad Khan was a great believer in religious toleration. He believed that all religions had a certain underlying unity, which could be called practical morality. Believing that a person's religion was his or her private affair, he roundly condemned any sign of religious bigotry in personal relations. He was also opposed to communal friction. He appealed to Hindus and Muslims to unite.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan wrote in favor of raising the women's status in society and advocated removal of purdah and spread of education among women. He also condemned the customs of polygamy and easy divorce.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan was helped by a band of loyal followers who are collectively described as the Aligarh School.

Muhammad Iqbal
•	One of the greatest poets of modern India, Muhammad Iqbal (1876- 1938) also profoundly influenced by his poetry, the philosophical and religious outlook of the younger generation of Muslims as well as of Hindus.

•	Iqbal was basically a humanist. In fact, he raised human action to the status of a prime virtue.
 











•	Based on the various religious practices and the personal laws, it was assumed that the status of women was inferior to that of men.

•	After 1880s, when Dufferin hospitals, named after Lady Dufferin (wife of the Viceroy), were started, efforts were made make modern medicine and child delivery techniques available to Indian Women.

•	Sarojini Naidu, the famous poetess, became the President of the National Congress in 1925.

•	In 1937, several women became ministers or parliamentary secretaries.

•	All India Women's Conference founded in 1927.

•	Women's struggle for equality took a big step forward after the independence.

•	Articles 14 and 15 of the Indian Constitution (1950) guaranteed the complete equality of men and women.

•	The Hindu Succession Act of 1956 made the daughter an equal co-heir with the son.

•	The Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 permitted dissolution of marriage on specific grounds.

•	Monogamy has been made mandatory for men as well as women.

•	The Constitution gives women equal right to work and to get employment in State agencies.
 
Indian History



•	The Directive Principles of the Constitution lay down the principle of equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
 











•	The Hindus were divided into numerous castes (jath). The caste, into which a person was born, determined large areas of his/her life.

•	The caste system determined whom he/she would marry and with whom he/she would didn’t.

•	Caste largely determined one’s profession and his social loyalties. The castes were carefully graded into a hierarchy of status.

•	At the bottom of the ranking, scheduled castes (or untouchables caste) came, they constituted about 20 per cent of the Hindu population.

•	The untouchables suffered from numerous and severe disabilities and restrictions, which of course varied from place to place. Their touch was considered impure and was a source of pollution.

•	In some parts of the country, particularly in the South, their shadow was avoided, so that they had to move away if a Brahmin was seen or heard coming.

•	The scheduled caste could not enter the Hindu temples or study the shartras.

•	Often scheduled caste’s children could not attend a school in which children of upper caste (of Hindus) studied.

•	Public services such as the police and other were closed for them.

•	The untouchables were forced to take up menial and other such jobs which were considered as 'unclean,' for example, scavenging, shoe-making, removing dead bodies, skinning dead animals, tanning hides and skins, etc.

•	The caste system was an evil in modern times, it became a major obstacle in the growth of a united national feeling and the spread of democracy.

•	The introduction of modern industries, railways, and buses and growing urbanization made it difficult to prevent mass contact among persons of different castes, especially in the cities.

•	Modern commerce and industry opened new fields of economic activity to all.

•	Modern democratic and rationalist ideas spread among Indians and they raised their voice against the caste system.
 
Indian History



•	The Brahma Samaj, the Prarthana Samaj, the Arya Samaj, the Ramakrishna Mission, the Theosophists, the Social Conference, and nearly all the great reforms of the 19th century attacked on the caste system.

•	The growth of the national movement played a significant role in waning the caste system. The national movement was opposed to all institutions which tended to divide Indian people.

•	All his life, Gandhi ji kept the abolition of untouchability in the front of his public activities.

•	Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, who belonged to one of the scheduled castes, devoted his entire life to fighting against caste tyranny.

•	Ambedkar organized the “All India Depressed Classes Federation” for the purpose.

•	In South India, the non-Brahmins organized during the 1920s the “Self- Respect Movement” to fight the disabilities, which Brahmins had opposed.

•	The Constitution of Independent India has provided the legal framework for the final abolition of untouchability. It has declared that “untouchability” is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden and punishable.
 












Introduction
•	The Indian national movement in its early days had increasingly made a large number of people conscious of the evils of foreign domination and of the need for fostering patriotism. It had imparted the necessary political training to the educated Indians.

•	There was a strong demand for more vigorous political action and methods than those of meetings, petitions, memorials, and speeches in the legislative councils.

Recognition of True Nature of British Rule
•	The politics of the moderate nationalists were founded on the belief that British rule could be reformed from within. But the spread of knowledge regarding political and economic questions gradually undermined this belief.

•	The nationalist writers and agitators blamed British rule for the poverty of the people. Politically conscious Indians were convinced that the purpose of British rule was to exploit India economically, that is, to enrich England at the cost of India.

•	The nationalists realized that India could make little progress in the economic field unless British imperialism was replaced by a government controlled and run by the Indian people.

•	In 1898, a law was passed making it an offence to excite "feelings of disaffection" towards the foreign government.

•	In 1899, the number of Indian members in the Calcutta Corporation was reduced.

•	In 1904, the Indian Official Secrets Act was passed restricting the freedom of the press.

•	The Nathu brothers were deported in 1897 without trial; even the charges against them were not made public.

•	In 1897, Lokamanya Tilak and other newspaper editors were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for arousing the people against the foreign government.
 

•	The moderate leader Gokhale complained that "the bureaucracy was growing frankly selfish and openly hostile to national aspirations."

•	The Indian Universities Act of 1904 was seen by the nationalists as an attempt to bring Indian universities under tighter official control and to check the growth of higher education.

•	Gradually, an increasing number of Indians were getting convinced that self- government was essential for the sake of the economic, political, and cultural progress of the country and that political enslavement meant stunting the growth of the Indian people.

Growth of Self-respect and Self-confidence
•	By the end of the 19th century, the Indian nationalists had grown in self- respect and self-confidence. They had acquired faith in their capacity to govern themselves and in the future development of their country.

•	Tilak and Bipin Chandra Pal preached the message of self-respect and asked the nationalists to rely on the character and capacities of the Indian people.

•	The nationalists taught the people that the remedy to their sad condition lay in their own hands and that they should, therefore, become fearless and strong.

•	Swami Vivekananda, though not a political leader, again and again, drove home the message that “If there is a sin in the world it is weakness; avoid all weakness, weakness is sin, weakness is death… and here is the test of truth – anything that makes you weak physically, intellectually and spiritually, reject as poison, there is no life in it, it cannot be true.”

•	Swami Vivekananda wrote that “The only hope of India is from the masses. The upper classes are physically and morally dead.”

•	The educated Indians became the best propagators and followers of militant nationalism both because they were low-paid or unemployed and because they were educated in modern thought and politics and European and world history.

Existence of Militant Nationalist School of Thought
•	From almost the beginning of the national movement a school of militant nationalism had existed in the country. This school was represented by leaders like Rajnarain Bose and Ashwini Kumar Dutt in Bengal and Vishnu Shastri Chiplunkar in Maharashtra.

•	The most outstanding representative of militant school was Bal Gangadhar Tilak later popularly known as Lokamanya Tilak.
 

•	Tilak was born in 1856. From the day of his graduation from the Bombay University, he devoted his entire life to the service of the country.

•	From 1889, Tilak edited the Kesari and preached nationalism in its columns and taught people to become courageous, self-reliant, and selfless fighters in the cause of India's independence.

•	In 1893, Tilak started using the traditional religious Ganpati festival to propagate nationalist ideas through songs and speeches, and in 1895, he started the Shivaji festival to stimulate nationalism among young Maharashtrians by holding up the example of Shivaji for emulation.

•	During 1896-1897, Tilak initiated a ‘no-tax’ campaign in Maharashtra. He asked the famine-stricken peasants of Maharashtra to withhold payment of land revenue if their crops had failed.

•	Tilak set a real example of boldness and sacrifice when the authorities arrested him in 1897 on the charge of spreading hatred and disaffection against the government. He refused to apologize to the government and was sentenced to 18 months rigorous imprisonment.
 











•	The conditions for the emergence of militant nationalism had developed when in 1905 the partition of Bengal was announced.
•	On 20 July 1905, Lord Curzon issued an order dividing the province of Bengal into two parts i.e. Eastern Bengal and Assam with a population of 31 million and the rest of Bengal with a population of 54 million, of whom 18 million were Bengalis and 36 million were Biharis and Oriyas.

•	The Indian National Congress and the nationalists of Bengal firmly opposed the partition.

•	The Anti-Partition Movement was initiated on 7 August 1905. On that day, a massive demonstration against the partition was organized in the Town Hall in Calcutta.

•	The partition too effect on 16 October 1905. The leaders of the protest movement declared it to be a day of national mourning throughout Bengal.

Swadeshi and Boycott
•	Mass meetings were held all over Bengal where Swadeshi or use of Indian goods and boycott of British goods were proclaimed and pledged. At many
 

places, public tannings of foreign cloth were organized and shops selling foreign cloth were picketed.

•	The Swadeshi movement gave a great deal of encouragement to Indian industries. Many textile mills, soap and match factories, handloom weaving concerns, national banks, and insurance companies were opened.

•	The Swadeshi movement had several consequences in the realm of culture. There was a flowering of nationalist poetry, prose, and journalism.

•	National educational institutions where literary, technical, or physical education was imparted were opened by nationalists who regarded the existing system of education as denationalizing and, in any case, inadequate.

•	On 15 August 1906, a National Council of Education was set up. A National College with Aurobindo Ghose as principal was started in Calcutta.

Role of Students, Women, Muslims, & Masses
•	A noticeable part in the Swadeshi agitation was played by the students of Bengal. They practiced and propagated swadeshi and took the lead in organizing picketing of shops selling foreign cloth. They were perhaps the main creators of the swadeshi spirit in Bengal.

•	The government made every attempt to suppress the students. Orders were issued to penalize those schools and colleges whose students took an active part in the Swadeshi agitation: their grants-in-aid and other privileges were to be withdrawn.

•	Many students were fined, expelled from schools and colleges, arrested, and some time beaten by the police. However, students refused to be cowed down.

•	The traditionally home-centered women of the urban middle classes joined processions and picketing. Likewise, from this time, students were taken an active part in the nationalist movement.

•	Many prominent Muslims joined the Swadeshi movement including Abdul Rasul, the famous barrister, Liaquat Husain, the popular agitator, and Guznavi, the businessman.

•	Tilak quickly observed that with the inauguration of this movement in Bengal, a new chapter in the history of Indian nationalism had opened i.e. the challenge and an opportunity to lead a popular struggle against the British Raj and to unite the entire country in one bond of common sympathy.
 

•	The Governments of the two Bengals, particularly of East Bengal made active efforts to divide Hindus and Muslims. Seeds of Hindu-Muslim disunity in Bengal politics were perhaps sown at this time, which embittered the nationalists.

•	As the consequences of Swadeshi movement:

o	Shouting of ‘Bande Mataram’ in public streets in East Bengal was banned;

o	Public meetings were restricted and sometimes forbidden;

o	Laws controlling the press were enacted;

o	Swadeshi workers were prosecuted and imprisoned for the long periods;

o	Many students were given corporal punishment;

o	Prosecutions against a large number of nationalist newspapers were launched and freedom of the press was completely suppressed;

o	Military police was stationed in many towns where it clashed with the people;

o	In December 1908, nine Bengal leaders, including the venerable Krishna Kumar Mitra and Ashwini Kumar Dutt were deported;

o	Earlier in 1907, Lala Lajpat Rai and Ajit Singh had been deported; and

o	In 1908, the great Tilak was again arrested and given the savage sentence of 6 years imprisonment.

Growth of Revolutionary Terrorism
•	Government repression and frustration caused by the failure of the political struggle ultimately resulted in revolutionary terrorism.

•	The Yugantar wrote on 22 April 1906 after the Barisal Conference: "The remedy lies with the people themselves. The 30 crores of people inhabiting India must raise their 60 crores of hands to stop this curse of oppression. Force must be stopped by force."

•	The revolutionary young men did not try to generate a mass revolution. Instead, they decided to copy the methods of the Irish terrorists and the Russian Nihilists, that is, to assassinate unpopular officials.

•	In 1897, the Chapekar brothers assassinated two unpopular British officials at Poona.
 

•	In 1904, V.D. Savarkar had organized the Abhinava Bharat, a secret society of revolutionaries.

•	After 1905, several newspapers had begun to advocate revolutionary terrorism. The Sandhya and the Yugantar in Bengal and the Kal in Maharashtra were the most prominent among them.

•	In April 1908, Khudiram Bose and Prafulla Chaki threw a bomb at a carriage, which they believed was occupied by Kingsford, the unpopular Judge at Muzzaffarpur. Prafulla Chaki shot himself dead while Khudiram Bose was hanged.

•	Many secret societies of terrorist youth came into existence. The most famous of these was the Anushilan Samiti whose Dacca section alone had 500 branches.

•	Soon terrorist societies became active in the rest of the country also. They became so bold as to throw a bomb at the Viceroy, Lord Harding, while he was riding on an elephant in a state procession at Delhi. The Viceroy was wounded.

•	The terrorists also established centers of activity abroad. In London, the lead was taken by Shyamji Krishnavarma, V.D. Savarkar, and Har Dayal, while in Europe Madam Cama and Ajit Singh were the prominent leaders.

•	The terrorists did mike a valuable contribution to the growth of nationalism in India.
 











•	After Bengal partition, all sections of the National Congress united in opposing the partition and supported the Swadeshi and Boycott movement of Bengal.

•	There was much public debate and disagreement between the moderate and the militant nationalists. While the latter wanted to extend the mass movement in Bengal as well as in the rest of the country, the Moderates wanted to confine the movement to Bengal and even there to limit it to Swadeshi and Boycott.

•	There was a tussle between the militant nationalists and moderates for the president-ship of the National Congress. In the end, Dadabhai Naoroji, respected by all nationalists as a great patriot, was chosen as a compromise.

•	Dadabhai electrified the nationalist ranks by openly declaring in his presidential address that the goal of the Indian national movement was 'self-government' or Swaraj, like that of the United Kingdom or the colonies.

•	The split between the two came at the Surat session of the National Congress in December 1907: The moderate leaders having captured the machinery of the Congress excluded the militant elements from it.

•	In the long run, the split did not prove useful to either party. The moderate leaders lost touch with the younger generation of nationalists.

•	The British Government played the game of 'Divide and Rule' and tried to win over moderate nationalist opinion so that the militant nationalists could be isolated and suppressed.

•	To appease the moderate nationalists it announced constitutional concessions through the Indian Councils Act of 1909, which are known as the Morley- Minto Reforms of 1909.

•	In 1911, the Government also announced the cancellation of the partition of Bengal. Western and eastern Bengals were to be reunited while a new province consisting of Bihar and Orissa was to be created.

•	In 1911, the seat of the Central Government was moved from Calcutta to Delhi.

•	The Morley-Minto Reforms Increased the number of elected members in the Imperial Legislative Council and the provincial councils. But most of the elected members were elected indirectly, by the provincial councils in the case of the Imperial Council and by municipal committees and district boards in the case
 
Indian History

of provincial councils. Some of the elected seats were reserved for landlords and British capitalists in India.

•	Out of the 68 members of the Imperial Legislative Council, 36 were officials and 5 were nominated non-officials.

•	Of the 27 elected members, 6 were to represent the big landlords and 2 the British capitalists.

•	The reformed councils still enjoyed no real power, being merely advisory bodies. The reforms in no way changed the undemocratic and foreign character of British rule or the fact of foreign economic exploitation of the country.

•	The Reforms also introduced the system of separate electorates under which all Muslims were grouped in separate constituencies from which Muslims alone could be elected. This was done for the sake of protecting the Muslim minority. But in reality, this was a part of the policy of dividing Hindus and Muslims and thus maintaining British supremacy in India.

•	The system of separate electorates was based on the idea that the political and economic interests of Hindus and Muslims were separate. This notion was unscientific because religions cannot be the basis of political and economic interests or of political groupings.

•	The moderate nationalists did not fully support the Morley-Minto Reforms. They soon realized that the Reforms had really not granted much.

Nationalists & World War I
•	In June 1914, the First World War broke out between Great Britain, France, Italy, Russia, Japan, and the United States of America on one side and Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Turkey on the other.

•	In the beginning, the Indian nationalist leaders, including Lokamanya Tilak, who had been released in June 1914, decided to support the war effort of the British Government.

•	The nationalists adopted an actively pro-British attitude mainly in the mistaken belief that grateful Britain would repay India’s loyalty with gratitude and enable India to take a long step forward on the road to self-government.
 











•	Modern political consciousness was late in developing among the Muslims. As nationalism spread among the Hindus and Parsees of the lower middle class, it failed to grow equally rapidly among the Muslims of the same class.

•	After the suppression of the 1857 Revolt, the British officials had taken a particularly vindictive attitude towards the Muslims, hanging 27,000 Muslims in Delhi alone.

•	To check the growth of a united national feeling in the country, the British decided to follow more actively the policy of 'Divide and Rule' and to divide the people along religious lines. They encourage communal and separatist tendencies in Indian politics.

•	The British promoted provincialism by talking of Bengali domination. They tried to utilize the caste structure to turn the non-Brahmins against Brahmins and the lower castes against the higher castes.

•	In U.P. and Bihar, where Hindus and Muslims had always lived in peace, the British actively encouraged the movement to replace Urdu as a court language by Hindi.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan laid the foundations of Muslim communalism when in the 1880's he gave up his earlier views and declared that the political interests of Hindus and Muslims were not the same but different and even divergent.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan preached complete obedience to British rule. When the Indian National Congress was founded in 1885, he decided to oppose it and tried to organize along with Raja Shiva Prasad of Varanasi a movement of loyalty to British rule.

•	Sayyid Ahmad Khan urged the Muslims not to listen to Badruddin Tyabji’s appeal to join the National Congress.

•	Sayyid Ahmed Khan and others raised the demand for special treatment for the Muslims in the matter of government services.

•	Bombay was the only province where the Muslims had taken to commerce and education quite early; and the Nationalist Congress included in its ranks such brilliant Muslims as Badruddin Tyabji, R.M. Sayani, A. Bhhimji, and the young barrister Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
 

•	In his presidential address to the National Congress of 1886, Dadabhai had given the clear assurance that the Congress would take up only national questions and would not deal with religious and social matters.

•	In 1889, the Congress adopted the principle that it would not take up any proposal which was considered harmful to the Muslims by a majority of the Muslim delegates to the Congress.

•	Many Hindus began to talk of Hindu nationalism and many Muslims of Muslim nationalism.

•	The politically immature people failed to realize that their economic, educational, and cultural difficulties were the result of common subjection to foreign rule and of economic backwardness and that only through common effort they could free their country, develop it economically, and thus solve the underlying common problems, such as unemployment and poverty.

•	In 1906, the All India Muslim League was founded under the leadership of the Aga Khan, the Nawab of Dacca, and Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk.

•	The Muslim League supported the partition of Bengal and demanded special safeguards for the Muslims in government services.

•	To increase its usefulness, the British also encouraged the Muslim League to approach the Muslim masses and to assume their leadership.

•	The educated Muslim young men were, in particular, attracted by radical nationalist ideas.
 



•	The militant nationalist Ahrar movement was founded at this time under the leadership of Maulana Mohammed Ali, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Hann Imam, Maulana Zafar Ali Khan, and Mazhar-ut-Haq. These young men disliked the loyalist politics of the Aligarh school and the big nawabs and zamindars. Moved by modern ideas of self-government, they advocated active participation in the militant nationalist movement.

•	Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Maulana Mohammed Ali and other young men preached a message of courage and fearlessness and said that there was no conflict between Islam and nationalism.
 











•	Two Home Rule Leagues were started in 1915-16, one under the leadership of Annie Besant, and S. Subramaniya Iyer.

•	The two Home Rule Leagues carried out intense propaganda all over the country in favor of the demand for the grant of Home Rule or self-government to India after the War.

•	It was during Home Rule agitation, Tilak gave the popular slogan i.e. “Home Rule is my birth-right, and I will have it.”

•	The war period also witnessed the growth of the revolutionary movement, as the terrorist groups spread from Bengal and Maharashtra to the whole of northern India.

•	Indian revolutionary in the United States of America and Canada had established the “Ghadar (Rebellion) Party in 1913.”

•	Most of the members of Ghadar Party were Sikh peasants and soldiers, but their leaders were mostly educated Hindus or Muslims.

•	Ghadar Party had active members in some other countries as well including Mexico, Japan, China, Philippines, Malaya, Singapore, Thailand, East and South Africa.

•	The Ghadar Party was pledged to wage a revolutionary war against the British in India.

•	As soon as the First World War I broke out in 1914, the Ghadarites decided to send arms and men to India to start an uprising with the help of soldiers and local revolutionaries.
 


 

•	Several thousand men volunteered to come back to India. Millions of dollars were contributed to pay for their expenses. Many gave their life-long savings and sold their lands and other property.

•	The Ghadarites also contacted Indian soldiers in the Far East, South-East Asia, and all over India and persuaded several regiments to rebel.

•	21 February 1915 was fixed as the date for an armed revolt in the Punjab. Unfortunately, the British authorities came to know of Ghadarites’ plans and took immediate action.

•	The rebellious regiments were disbanded and their leaders were either imprisoned or hanged. For example, 12 men of the 23rd Cavalry were executed. The leaders and members of the Ghadar Party in the Punjab were arrested on a mass scale.

•	42 of arrested men were hanged, 114 were transported for life, and 93 were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.

•	Many of the Ghadarites, after their release, founded the Kirti and Communist movements in the Punjab. Some of the prominent Ghadar leaders were: Baba Gurmukh Singh, Kartar Singh Saraba, Sohan Singh Bhakna, Rahmat Ali Shah, Bhai Parmanand, and Mohammad Barkatullah.

•	Inspired by the Ghadar Party, 700 men of the 5th Light Infantry at Singapore revolted under the leadership of Jamadar Chisti Khan and Subedar Dundey Khan. They were crushed after a bitter battle in which many died. Thirty-seven others were publicly executed, while 41 were transported for life.
 

•	In 1915, during an unsuccessful revolutionary attempt, Jatin Mukerjea popularly known as 'Bagha Jatin’ died while fighting a battle with the police at Balasore.

•	Rash Bihari Bose, Raja Mahendra Pratap, Lala Hardayal, Abdul Rahim, Maulana Obaidullah Sindhi, Champak Raman Pillai, Sardar Singh Rana, and Madam Cama were some of the prominent Indians who carried on revolutionary activities and propaganda outside India.

Congress Lucknow Session
•	The nationalists soon saw that disunity in their ranks was injuring their cause and that they must put up a united front.

•	Urge for the unity produced two historic developments at the Lucknow Session of the Indian national Congress in 1916: i.e.

o	The two wings i.e. Indian National Congress and Muslim League united, as their split had not benefited either group; and

o	The Congress and the All Indian Muslim league put up a common political demands.

•	An important role in bringing the moderates and extremists together was played by Lokamanya Tilak.

•	The British felt necessary to appease the nationalists; therefore, they heavily relied on repression to quieten the nationalist agitation. Large numbers of radical nationalists and revolutionaries had been jailed or interned under the notorious Defence of India Act and other similar regulations.
 












Introduction
•	To win popular support for their war effort, the Allied nations – Britain, the United States, France, Italy, and Japan, promised a new era of democracy and national self-determination to all the peoples of the world; but after their victory, they showed little willingness to end the colonial system.

•	Nationalism had gathered its forces and the nationalists were expecting major political gains after the war; and they were willing to fight back if their expectations were thwarted.

•	The economic situation in the post-war years had taken a turn for the worse. There was first a rise in prices and then a depression in economic activity.

•	The Indian industries, which had prospered during the war because foreign imports of manufactured goods had ceased, now faced losses and closure.

•	The Indian industrialists wanted protection of their industries through imposition of high customs duties and grant of government aid; they realized that a strong nationalist movement and an independent Indian Government alone could secure their demands.

•	The workers, facing unemployment and high prices and living in great poverty, also turned actively towards the nationalist movement.

•	Indian Soldiers, returned with their triumphs from Africa, Asia, and Europe, imparted some of their confidence and their knowledge of the wide world to the rural areas.

•	The peasantry, groaning under deepening poverty and high taxation, was waiting for a lead. On the other hand, the urban educated Indians were dissented because of increasing unemployment.

•	A major impetus to the national movements was given by the impact of the Russian Revolution.

•	On 7 November 1917, the Bolshevik (Communist) Party, led by V.I. Lenin, overthrew the Czarist regime in Russia and declared the formation of the first socialist state, the Soviet Union, in the history of the world.
 

•	The Russian Revolution gave people self-confidence and indicated to the leaders of the national movement that they should rely on the strength of the common people.

•	The Government, aware of the rising tide of nationalist and anti-government sentiments, once again decided to follow the policy of the 'carrot and the stick,' in other words, of concessions and repression.

Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms
•	In 1918, Edwin Montagu, the Secretary of State, and Lord Chelmsford, the Viceroy, produced their scheme of constitutional reforms which led to the enactment of the Government of India Act of 1919.

Government of India Act
•	Major provisions of Government of India Act of 1919 were:

•	The Provincial Legislative Councils were enlarged and the majority of their members were to be elected.

•	The provincial governments were given more powers under the system of Diarchy.

•	Under the Diarchy system, auditory subjects, such as finance and law and order, were called 'reserved' subjects and remained under the direct control of the Governor; others such as education, public health, and local self- government, were called 'transferred' subjects and were to be controlled by ministers responsible to the legislatures.

•	The Governor retained complete control over the finances. The Governor could, moreover, overrule the ministers on any grounds that he considered special.

•	At the center, there were to be two houses of legislature i.e.

1.	The lower house, the Legislative Assembly, was to have 41 nominated members in a total strength of 144.

2.	The upper house, the Council of State, was to have 26 nominated and 34 elected members.

•	The legislature had virtually no control over the Governor-General and his Executive Council. On the other hand, the Central Government had unrestricted control over the provincial governments and the right to vote was severely restricted.
 

•	Indian nationalists had, however, advanced far beyond such halting concessions. They were no longer willing to let an alien government decide their fitness for self-government, nor would they be satisfied with the shadow of political power.

•	The Indian National Congress met in a special session at Bombay in August 1918 under the president-ship of Hasan Imam to consider the reform proposals. It condemned them as "disappointing and unsatisfactory” - and demanded effective self-government instead.

The Rowlatt Act
•	In March 1919, the British Government passed the Rowlett Act even though every single Indian member of the Central Legislative Council opposed it. Three of them, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, Madan Mohan Malaviya, and Mazhar-ul-Huq resigned their membership of the Council.

•	This Act authorized the Government to imprison any person without trial and conviction in a court of law.

•	The Act would thus also enable the Government to suspend the right of Habeas Corpus which had been the foundation of civil liberties in Britain.

•	The Rowlett Act came like a sudden blow. To the people of India, promised extension of democracy during the war, the government step appeared to be a cruel joke.

•	People felt humiliated and were filled with anger. Unrest spread in the country and a powerful agitation against the Act arose.

•	During this agitation, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, took command of the nationalist movement.

 

•	Gandhiji planned for a “Satyagraha” against the Rowlatt Act. In 1919, a Satyagraha Sabha was formed and 6 April was fixed as the date to launch Satyagraha.
 












•	Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born on 2 October 1869 at Porbandar in Gujarat.

•	After attaining his legal education in Britain, Gandhiji went to South Africa to practice law.

•	Imbued with a high sense of justice, Gandhiji was revolted by the injustice, discrimination, and degradation to which Indians had to submit in the South African colonies.

•	Indian laborers who had gone to South Africa, and the merchants who followed were denied the right to vote. They had to register and pay a poll-tax. They could not reside except in prescribed locations, which were insanitary and congested.

•	In some of the South African colonies, the Asians, also the Africans, could not stay out of door after 9 p.m.; nor could they use public footpaths.
 



•	Gandhi soon became the leader of the struggle against these conditions and during 1893-94 was engaged in a heroic though unequal struggle against the racist authorities of South Africa.

•	It was during this long struggle lasting nearly two decades that Gandhiji evolved the technique of Satyagraha based on truth and non-violence.

•	The ideal satyagrahi was to be truthful and perfectly peaceful, but at the same time, Gandhiji would refuse to submit to what he considered wrong. He would accept suffering willingly in the course of struggle against the wrong-doer. This struggle was to be part of his love of truth.

•	In a famous article in his weekly journal, Young India, published in 1920, Gandhiji wrote that "Non-violence is the law of our species, as violence is the law of the brute", but that "where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence "

•	Gandhiji returned to India in 1915 at the age of 46. He was keen to serve his country and his people.

•	In 1916, Gandhi founded the Sabarmati Ashram at Ahmedabad where his friends and followers were to learn and, practice the ideals of truth and non- violence.

Champaran Satyagraha (1917)
•	Gandhi's first great experiment in Satyagraha came in 1917 in Champaran, a district in Bihar.

•	In Champaran, the peasants of the indigo plantations were excessively oppressed by the European planters. They were compelled to grow indigo on at least 3/20th of their land and to sell it at prices fixed by the planters.

•	Similar conditions had prevailed earlier in Bengal, but as a result of a major uprising during 1859-61 the peasants there had won their freedom from the indigo planters.

•	Having heard of Gandhi's campaigns in South Africa, several peasants of Champaran invited him to come and help them.

•	Accompanied by Baba Rajendra Prasad, Mazhar-ul-Huq, J. B. Kripalani, and Mahadev Desai, Gandhiji reached Champaran in 1917 and began to conduct a detailed inquiry into the condition of the peasants.

•	The infuriated district officials ordered him to leave Champaran, but he defied the order and was willing to face trial and imprisonment. This forced the
 

Government to cancel its earlier order and to appoint a committee of inquiry on which Gandhi served as a member.

•	Ultimately, the disabilities from which the peasantry was suffering were reduced and Gandhi had won his first battle of civil disobedience in India.

Ahmedabad Mill Strike
•	In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi intervened in a dispute between the workers and mill owners of Ahmedabad.

•	Gandhiji undertook a fast unto death to force a compromise. The mill owners relented on the fourth day and agreed to give the workers 35 per cent increase in wages.

•	Gandhiji also supported the peasants of Khaira in Gujarat in their struggle against the collection of land revenue when their crops had failed.

•	Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel left his lucrative practice at the Bar at this time to help Gandhiji.

•	These experiences (discussed above) brought Gandhiji in close contact with the masses whose interests he actively exposed all his life.

•	Gandhiji was the first Indian nationalist leader who identified his life and his manner of living with the life of the common people.

•	The following issues were very close to Gandhi's heart:

a.	Hindu-Muslim unity;

b.	The fight against untouchability; and

c.	The raising of the social status of women in the country.

Satyagraha Against Rowlett Act
•	Along with other nationalists, Gandhiji was also aroused by the Rowlett Act.

•	In February 1919, he founded the Satyagraha Sabha whose members took a pledge to disobey the Act.

•	Gandhiji asked the nationalist workers to go to the villages. That is where India lives, he said.
 

•	Gandhiji increasingly turned the face of nationalism towards the common man and the symbol of this transformation was to be null, or hand-spun and handwoven cloth, which soon became the uniform of the nationalists.

•	Gandhiji emphasized on the dignity of labor and the value of self-reliance. India's salvation would come, he said, when the masses were wakened from their sleep and became active in politics.

•	March and April 1919 witnessed a remarkable political awakening in India. There were hartals (strikes) and demonstrations. The slogans of Hindu-Muslim unity filled the air. The entire country was electrified. The Indian people were no longer willing to submit to the degradation of foreign rule.
 


•	Gandhiji gave a call for a mighty hartal on 6 April 1919. The people responded with unprecedented enthusiasm.

•	The Government decided to meet the popular protest with repression, particularly in the Punjab.

•	An unarmed but large crowd had gathered on 13 April 1919 at Jallianwalla Bagh to protest against the arrest of their popular leaders, Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew and Dr. Satyapal.

•	Jallianwala Bagh (located in Amritsar, Punjab) was a large open space which was enclosed on three sides by buildings and had only one exit.

•	General Dyer surrounded the Bagh (garden) with his army until closed the exit with his troops, and then ordered his men to shoot onto the trapped crowd.

•	They fired till their ammunition was exhausted. Thousands were killed and wounded.

•	After this massacre, martial law was proclaimed throughout the Punjab and the people were submitted to most uncivilized atrocities.
 


•	The politically-conscious Muslims were critical of the treatment meted out to the Ottoman (or Turkish) Empire by Britain and its allies who had partitioned it and taken away Thrace from Turkey proper.

•	This was in violation of the earlier pledge of the British Premier, Lloyd George, who had declared: "Nor are we fighting to deprive Turkey of the rich and renowned lands of Asia Minor and Thrace which are predominantly Turkish in race."

•	The Muslims also felt that the position of the Sultan of Turkey, who was also regarded by many as the Caliph or the religious head of the Muslims, should not be undermined.

•	A Khilafat Committee was soon formed under the leadership of the Ali brothers, Maulana Azad, Hakim Ajmal Khan, and Hasrat Mohani, and a countrywide agitation was organized.

•	The All-India Khilafat Conference held at Delhi in November 1919, decided to withdraw all cooperation from the Government if their demands were not met.

•	The Muslim League, now under the leadership of nationalists, gave full support to the National Congress and its agitation on political issues.

•	The Congress leaders, including Lokamanya Tilak and Mahatma Gandhi, viewed the Khilafat agitation as a golden opportunity for cementing Hindu-Muslim unity and bringing the Muslim masses into the national movement.

•	The Congress leaders realized that different sections of the people—Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians, capitalists and workers, peasants and artisans, women and youth, and tribes and peoples of different regions—would come into the national movement through the experience of fighting for their own different demands and seeing that the alien regime stood in opposition to them.

•	In June 1920, an all-party conference met at Allahabad and approved a program of boycott of schools, colleges, and law courts.

•	The Khilafat Committee launched a non-cooperation movement on 31 August 1920.
 


 

•	The Congress met in special session in September 1920 at Calcutta. Only a few weeks earlier it had suffered a grievous loss—Lokamanya Tilak had passed away on 1 August at the age of 64.

•	The Congress supported Gandhi's plan for non-cooperation with the Government till the Punjab and Khilafat wrongs were removed and Swaraj established.

•	“The British people will have to beware,” declared Gandhiji at Nagpur, that if they do not want to do justice, it will be the bounden duty of every Indian to destroy the Empire.

•	The Nagpur session also made changes in the constitution of the Congress. Provincial Congress Committees were reorganized on the basis of linguistic areas.

•	Congress membership was thrown open to all men and women of the age of 21 or more on payment of 4 annas as annual subscription. However, in 1921, the age limit for membership was reduced to 18.

•	The years 1921 and 1922 witnessed an unprecedented movement of the Indian people. Thousands of students left government schools and colleges and joined national schools and colleges.

•	Hundreds	of	lawyers,	including Chittaranjan	Das (popularly known	as
Deshbandhu), Motilal Nehru, and Rajendra Prasad, gave up their legal practice.
 

•	The Tilak Swarajya Fund was started to finance the non-cooperation movement and within six months, over crore of rupees were subscribed.

•	Women showed great enthusiasm and freely offered their jewelry.

•	Huge bonfires of foreign cloth were organized all over the land.

•	Khadi soon became a symbol of freedom.

•	In July 1921, the All-India Khilafat Committee passed a resolution declaring that no Muslim should serve in the British Indian army.

•	In September, the Ali brothers were arrested for 'sedition'. Immediately, Gandhiji gave a call for repetition of this resolution at hundreds of meetings.

•	Fifty members of the All India Congress Committee issued a similar declaration that no Indian should serve the government which degraded India socially, economically, and politically.

•	By the end of 1921, all important nationalist leaders, except Gandhiji, were behind the bar along with 3,000 others.

•	In November 1921, huge demonstrations greeted the Prince of Wales, heir to the British throne, during his tour of India. He had been asked by the Government to come to India to encourage loyalty among the people and the princes.

•	In Bombay, the Government tried to suppress the demonstration by killing 53 persons and wounding about 400 or more.

•	The annual session of the Congress, meeting at Ahmedabad in December 1921, passed a resolution affirming "the fixed determination of the Congress to continue the program of non-violent non-cooperation with greater vigor than hitherto ….till the Punjab and Khilafat wrongs were redressed and Swarajya is established."

•	The resolution urged all Indians, and in particular students, "quietly and without any demonstration to offer themselves for arrest by belonging to the volunteer organizations."

•	All such Satyagrahis were to take a pledge to "remain non-violent in word and deed to promote unity among Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis, Christians, and Jews, and to practice swadeshi and wear only khadi.

•	In Malabar (Northern Kerala), the Moplahs, or Muslim peasants, created a powerful anti-zamindar movement.
 

•	The Viceroy wrote to the Secretary of State in February 1919 that "The lower classes in the towns have been seriously affected by the non-cooperation movement.

•	On 1 February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi announced that he would start mass civil disobedience, including non-payment of taxes, unless within seven days the political prisoners were released and the press freed from government control.

Withdrawal of Civil Disobedience Movement
•	On 5 February 1922, a Congress procession of 3,000 peasants at Chauri Chaura, a village in the Gorakhpur District of U.P., was fired upon by the police. The angry crowd attacked and burnt the police station causing the death of 22 policemen.

•	Gandhiji took a very serious view of Chauri Chaura incident. It convinced him that the nationalist workers had not yet properly understood nor learnt the practice of non-violence without which, he was convinced, civil disobedience could not be a success.

•	Apart from the fact that Gandhiji would have nothing to do with violence, he also perhaps believed that the British would be able to crush easily a violent movement, for people had not yet built up enough strength and stamina to resist government repression.
 

•	Gandhiji, therefore, decided to suspend the nationalist campaign. The Congress Working Committee met at Bardoli in Gujarat on 12 February and passed a resolution stopping all activities, which would lead to breaking of laws.

•	The Bardoli resolution stunned the country and had a mixed reception among the nationalists, while some had implicit faith in Gandhiji, others resented this decision to retreat.

•	The first non-cooperation and civil disobedience movement virtually came to an end.

•	The Government arrested Mahatma Gandhiji on 10 March and charged him with spreading disaffection against the Government. Gandhiji was sentenced to six years imprisonment.

End of Khilafat Agitation
•	Very soon the Khilafat, question also lost relevance. The people of Turkey rose up under the leadership of Mustafa Kamal Pasha and, in November 1922, deprived the Sultan of his political power.

•	Kamal Pasha took many measures to modernize Turkey and to make it a secular state. He abolished the Caliphate (or the institution of the Caliph) and separated the state from religion by eliminating Islam from the Constitution.

•	Kamal Pasha nationalized education, granted women extensive rights, introduced legal codes based on European models, and took steps to develop agriculture and to introduce modern industries. All these steps broke the back of the Khilafat agitation.

•	In December 1922, Chittaranjan Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Congress- Khilafat Swaraj Party; Das as president and Motilal Nehru as one of the secretaries.

•	The communal elements took advantage of the situation to propagate their views and after 1923, the country was repeatedly plunged into communal riots.

•	The Muslim League and the Hindu Mahasabha, which was founded in December 1917, once again became active. The result was that the growing feeling that all people were Indians first received a set-back.

•	The Swarajist Party, whose main leaders, Motilal Nehru and Das, were staunch nationalists, was split by communalism.

•	A group known as “responsivists” including Madan Mohan Malviya, Lala Lajpat Rai, and N. C. Kelkar, offered cooperation to the Government so that the so- called Hindu interests might be safeguarded.
 



•	In September 1924, Gandhiji went on 21 days fast at Maulana Mohammed Ali’s house in Delhi to do penance for the inhumanity revealed in the communal riots. But his efforts were of little avail.
 












Introduction
•	Socialist and Communist groups came into existence in the 1920s. M. N. Roy became the first Indian elected to the leadership of the Communist International.

•	In 1924, the Government arrested Muzaffer Ahmed and S. A. Dange, accused them of spreading Communist ideas, and filed a case against them along the others involved in the Kanpur Conspiracy case.

•	In 1928, under the leadership of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the peasants organized a “No Tax Campaign” and won their demand.

•	The trade unionism had grown during the early 1920s under the leadership of the All India Trade Union Congress.

•	All India Trade Union Congress was established in October 1920 at Bombay.

Resurgence of Revolutionary Movement
•	The failure of the first non-cooperation movement had led to the revival of the Revolutionary Movement. Therefore, after an All India Conference, the Hindustan Republican Association was founded in October 1924 to organize an armed revolution.

•	The revolutionists soon came under the influence of socialist ideas; in 1928, under the leadership of Chandra Shekhar Azad, changed the title of the organization from the “Hindustan Republican Association” to the “Hindustan Socialist Republican Association.”

•	Bhagat Singh and B.K. Dutt threw a bomb in the Central Legislative Assembly on 8 April 1929 to protest against the passage of the Public Safety Bill, which would have reduced civil liberties.

•	The bomb did not harm anyone, as it had been deliberately made harmless. The aim was not to kill but, as a fear leaflet put it, “to make the deaf hear.”

•	Bhagat Singh and B. K. Dutt could have easily escaped after throwing the bomb, but they deliberately chose to be arrested for they wanted to make use of the court as a forum for revolutionary propaganda.
 

•	In April 1930, a raid was manipulated on the government armory at Chittagong under the leadership of Surya Sen.

•	The remarkable aspect of the revolutionary movement in Bengal was the participation of young women.

•	To protest against the horrible conditions in the prisons, Jatin Das sat on hunger strike; as a result of which, he attained martyrdom after 63 days of epic fast.

•	In spite of huge protests, Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev, and Rajguru were executed on 23 March 1931.

•	In February, 1931, Chandra Shekhar Azad was killed in a shooting encounter with the police in a public park; later this park renamed as Azad Park (located at Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh).

•	Surya Sen was arrested in February 1933 and hanged soon after.

•	In March 1929, thirty-one prominent trade union and communist leaders (including three Englishmen) were arrested and after a trial (known as Meerut Conspiracy Case) lasting four years, sentenced for long periods of imprisonment.

Boycott of Simon Commission
•	In November 1927, the British Government appointed the Indian Statutory Commission to work on the constitutional reform, named as ‘Simon Commission,’ after the name of its Chairman John Simon.

•	All members of the Simon Commission were Englishmen, which was unanimously protested by all Indians.
 


 
•	At its Madras Session in 1927, presided over by Dr. Ansari, the National Congress decided to boycott the Simon Commission “at every stage and in every form.”

•	On February 3, 1928, the day the Simon Commission reached Bombay, an all India strike was proclaimed. Wherever the Commission went, it was greeted with strikes and   black-flag   demonstrations   under   the slogan ‘Simon Go Back.’

Nehru Report
•	An All Parties Conference was convened for the purpose first at Delhi and then at Poona. The Conference appointed a sub-committee headed by Motilal Nehru and included among its members Ali Imam, Tej Bahadur Sapru, and Subhash Bose.

•	In August 1928, the sub-committee submitted its report known as the “Nehru Report.”
•	The Nehru Report recommended that
•	The attainment of Dominion Status should be considered the "next immediate step;"
•	India should be a federation built on the basis of linguistic provinces and provincial autonomy;
•	The executive should be fully responsible to the legislature;
•	The elections should be by joint electorates and on the basis of adult suffrage; and
 

•	The seats in the legislatures should be reserved for religious minorities for a period of 10 years.
•	Unfortunately, the All Party Convention, held at Calcutta in December 1928, failed to pass the Nehru Report.

•	Objections were raised by some of the communal-minded leaders belonging to the Muslim League, the Hindu Mahasabha and the Sikh League.

•	The Muslim League was itself split on the issue along nationalist and communal lines. Mohammed Ali Jinnah put forth his "fourteen points" demands at this time, claiming, among other things −
•	Separate electorates;
•	One third of the seats in the central legislature for the Muslims;
•	Reservation of seats for the Muslims in Bengal and the Punjab in proportion to population; and
•	The vesting of residual powers in the provinces.

•	The Hindu Mahasabha denounced the Nehru Report as pro-Muslim. Thus the prospects of national unity were foiled by communal groups.
 











•	Gandhiji came back to active politics and attended the Calcutta session of the Congress in December 1928.

•	Jawaharlal Nehru was now made the President of the Congress at the historic Lahore session of 1929. This event had its romantic side, as son had succeeded his father (i.e. Motilal Nehru, father of Jawaharlal Nehru was President of the Congress in 1928).

•	The Lahore session of the Congress gave voice to the new, militant spirit. It passed a resolution declaring Poorna Swaraj (Full Independence) to be the Congress objective.

•	On December 31, 1929, a newly adopted tri-color flag of freedom hoisted and 26 January, 1930 was fixed as the first Independence Day, which was to be so celebrated every year with the people taking the pledge that it was “a crime against man and God to submit any longer” to British rule.

Second Civil Disobedience Movement
•	The Second Civil Disobedience Movement was started by Gandhiji on March 12, 1930 with his famous Dandi March.

•	Together with 78 chosen followers, Gandhiji walked nearly 200 miles from Sabarmati Ashram to Dandi, a village on the Gujarat sea-coast. Here Gandhiji and his followers made salt in violation of the salt laws.

•	The act of making salt was a symbol of the Indian people's refusal to live under British-made laws or under the British rule.

•	The movement now spread rapidly. Everywhere in the country, people joined strikes, demonstrations, and the campaign to boycott foreign goods and to refuse to pay taxes.

•	The movement reached the extreme north-western corner of India and stirred the brave and hardy Pathans.

•	Under the leadership of Khan Abdul Ghaffer Khan, popularly known as "the Frontier Gandhi", the Pathans organized the society of Khudai Khidmatgars (or Servants of God), known popularly as Red Shirts.
 

•	Nagaland produced a brave heroine i.e. Rani Gaidinliu who at the age of 13 responded to the call of Gandhiji and the Congress and raised the banner of rebellion against foreign rule.

•	The young Rani was captured in 1932 and sentenced to life imprisonment. She wasted her bright youthful years in the dark cells of various Assam jails, to be released only in 1947 by the Government of free India.

•	The British Government summoned in London in 1930, the first Round Table Conference of Indian leaders and spokesmen of the British Government to discuss the Simon Commission Report. But the National Congress boycotted the Conference and its proceedings proved abortive.

•	Lord Irwin and Gandhi negotiated a settlement in March 1931. The Government agreed to release those political prisoners who had remained non-violent, while the Congress suspended the Civil Disobedience Movement and agreed to take part in the Second Round Table Conference.

•	The Karachi Session of Congress is also notable for a resolution on Fundamental Rights and the National Economic Program. The resolution guaranteed basic civil and political rights to the people.

•	Gandhiji went to England in September 1931 to attend the Second Round Table Conference. But in spite of his powerful advocacy, the British Government refused to concede the basic nationalist demand for freedom on the basis of the immediate grant of Dominion Status. On his return, the Congress resumed the Civil Disobedience Movement.

 

•	Just after the signing of the Gandhi-lrwin Pact, a crowd had been fired in East Godavari, in Andhra Pradesh, and four persons were killed simply because the people had put up Gandhi's portrait.

•	After the failure of the Round Table Conference, Gandhiji and other (cadets of the Congress were again arrested and the Congress declared illegal.

•	The Civil Disobedience Movement gradually waned and political enthusiasm and exhilaration gave way to frustration and depression.

•	The Congress officially suspended the movement in May 1933 and withdrew it in May 1934. Gandhi once again withdrew from active politics.

•	The Third Round Table Conference met in London in November 1932, without the leaders of the Congress.
 











•	After the Third Round Table Conference, the Government of India Act of 1935 passed.

•	The Act provided for the establishment of an All India Federation and a new system of government for the provinces on the basis of provincial autonomy.

•	The federation was to be based on a union of the provinces of British India and the Princely States.

•	There would be a bicameral federal legislature in which the States were given disproportionate weightage.

•	The representatives of the States were not to be elected by the people, but appointed directly by the rulers.

•	Only 14 per cent of the total population in British India was given the right to vote. Even this legislature, in which the Princes were once again to be used to check and counter the nationalist elements, was denied the real power.

•	Defence and foreign affairs remained outside the legislature’s control, while the Governor-General retained special control over the other subjects.

•	The Governor-General and the Governors were to be appointed by the British Government and were responsible for the governance.

•	In the provinces, local power was increased. The ministers responsible to the provincial assemblies were to control all departments of provincial administration. But the Governors were given special powers. They could veto legislative action and legislate on their own.

•	Moreover, the government retained full control over the civil service and the police.

•	The Act could not satisfy the nationalist aspiration for both political and economic power continued to be concentrated in the hands of the British Government.

•	Foreign rule was to continue as before, only a few popularly elected ministers were to be added to the structure of British administration in India.

•	The Congress condemned the Act as "totally disappointing."
 
Indian History

•	The federal part of the Act was never introduced, but the provincial part was soon put into operation.

•	Though bitterly opposed to the Act, the Congress contested the elections under the new Act of 1935.

•	The elections conclusively demonstrated that a large majority of Indian people supported the Congress, which swept the polls in most of the provinces.

•	Congress ministries were formed in July 1937 in seven out of eleven provinces. Later, Congress formed coalition governments in two others. Only Bengal and the Punjab had non-Congress ministries.

Congress Ministries
•	The important features of Congress Ministries after 1937 election were:

•	The Congress ministers reduced their own salaries drastically to Rs. 500 per month;

•	Most of them travelled in the second or third class railway compartments;

•	They set up new standards of honesty and public service;

•	They paid greater attention to primary, technical, and higher education and public health;

•	They helped the peasant by passing anti-usury and tenancy legislation;

•	They promoted civil liberties. Political prisoners were released;

•	There was "relaxation of police and secret service raj;"

•	Freedom of the press was enhanced; and

•	Trade unions felt freer and were able to win wage increases for workers.

•	The period between 1935 and 1939 witnessed several other important political developments which, in a way, marked a new turn in the nationalist movement and the Congress.
 











•	The decade of 1930s witnessed the rapid growth of socialist ideas within and outside the Congress.

•	In 1929, there was a great economic slump or depression in the United States, which gradually spread to the rest of the world resulting in economic distress and unemployment on a large scale (across the world). But the economic situation in the Soviet Union was just the opposite. There was not only no slump, but the years between 1929 and 1936 witnessed the successful completion of the first two Five Year Plans, which increased the Soviet industrial production by more than four times.

•	The world depression, thus, brought the capitalist system into disrepute and drew attention towards Marxism, socialism, and economic planning. Consequently, socialist ideas began to attract more and more people, especially the young, the workers, and the peasants.

•	The economic depression also worsened the conditions of the peasants and workers in India. The prices of agricultural products dropped by over 50 per cent by the end of 1932.

•	The employers tried to reduce wages. The peasants all over the country began to demand land reforms, reduction of land revenue and rent, and relief from indebtedness.

•	Workers in the factories and plantations increasingly demanded better conditions of work and recognition of their trade union rights. Consequently, there was rapid growth of trade unions in the cities and the Kisan Sabhas (peasants' unions) in many areas, particularly in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, and Punjab.

•	The first all-India peasant organization, the All-India Kisan Sabha was formed in 1936. The peasants also began to take a more active part in the national movement.

•	In his presidential address to the Lucknow Congress in 1936, Nehru urged the Congress to accept socialism as its goal and to bring itself closer to the peasantry and the working class.

•	In 1938, Subhash Chandra Bose had been re-elected as the president of the Congress even though Gandhi had opposed him. However, an opposition by Gandhi and his supporters in the Congress Working Committee compelled Bose to resign from the President-ship of the Congress in 1939.
 

Congress & World Affairs
•	During the period of 1935-1939, Congress actively participated for the development of world affairs. It had gradually developed a foreign policy based on opposition to the spread of imperialism.

•	In February 1927, Jawaharlal Nehru on behalf of the National Congress attended the Congress of oppressed nationalities at Brussels organized by political exiles and revolutionaries from the countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, suffering from economic or political imperialism.

•	In 1927, the Madras session of the National Congress warned the Government that the people of India would not support Britain in any war undertaken with its imperialist aims.

Princely States’ Struggle
•	Popular struggles by the princely states were waged in many of the states including Rajkot, Jaipur, Kashmir, Hyderabad, Travancore, etc.

•	People of many of the princely states now began to organize movements for democratic rights and popular governments.

•	All India States’ People’s Conference had already been founded in December 1927 to coordinate political activities in the different states.

•	In the Government of India Act of 1935, the proposed federal structure was so planned as to check the forces of nationalism. It was provided that the princes would get 2/5rd of the seats in the Upper House and 1/3rd of the seats in the Lower House.

•	The Nizam of Hyderabad declared that the popular agitation was anti-Muslim; the Maharaja of Kashmir branded it as anti-Hindu; while the Maharaja of Travancore claimed that Christians were behind the popular agitation.

•	The National Congress supported the states' people's struggle and urged the princes to introduce democratic representative government and to grant fundamental civil rights.

•	In 1938, when the Congress defined its goal of independence it included the independence of the princely states.

•	In 1939, Jawaharlal Nehru became the President of the All India States' People's Conference. The States' people's movement awakened the national consciousness among the people of the states. It also spread a new consciousness of unity all over India.
 

Growth of Communalism
•	In 1940, the Muslim League passed a resolution demanding partition of the country and the creation of a state to be called Pakistan after independence.

•	The Muslim League propaganda gained by the existence of such communal bodies among the Hindus as the Hindu Mahasabha.

•	The Hindu communalists echoed the Muslim communalists by declaring that the Hindus were a distinct nation and that India was the land of the Hindus. Thus they too accepted the two-nation theory.

•	The Hindu communalists actively opposed the policy of giving adequate safeguards to the minorities so as to remove their fears of domination by the majority.
 











•	The Second World War broke out in September 1939 when Nazi (Germany) invaded Poland in pursuance of Hitler’s scheme of German expansion.

•	The Government of India immediately joined the war without consulting the National Congress or the elected members of the central legislature.

•	The Congress leaders demanded that India must be declared free or at least effective power put in Indian hands before it could actively participate in the war. The British Government refused to accept this demand the Congress ordered its ministries to resign.

•	In October 1940, Gandhi gave the call for a limited Satyagraha by a few selected individuals.

•	By March 1942, Japan quickly overran the Philippines, Indo-China, Indonesia, Malaya, and Burma and occupied Rangoon. This brought the war to India’s door-step.

•	The British Government now desperately wanted the active cooperation of Indians in the war effort.

Cripps Mission
•	To secure this cooperation, British Government sent to India a mission headed by a Cabinet Minister, Sir Stafford Cripps in March 1942.

•	Cripps declared that the aim of British policy in India was "the earliest possible realization of self-government in India," but detailed negotiations between the British Government and the Congress leaders broke down, as the British Government refused to accept the Congress demand for the immediate transfer of effective power to Indians.

Quit India Movement
•	The All India Congress Committee met at Bombay on August 8, 1942. It passed the famous 'Quit India' Resolution and proposed the starting of a non-violent mass struggle under Gandhiji’s leadership to achieve this aim.

•	Early in the morning of August 9, Gandhiji and other Congress leaders were arrested and the Congress was once again declared illegal.
 

•	The news of these arrests left the country aghast, and a spontaneous movement of protest arose everywhere, giving expression to the pent up anger of the people.

•	All over the country there were strikes in factories, schools and colleges, and demonstrations which were lathi-charged and fired upon.

•	The Government on its part went all out to crush the 1942 movement. Its repression knew no bounds. The press was completely muzzled. The demonstrating crowds were machine-gunned and even bombed from the air.

•	In the end, the Government succeeded in crushing the movement. The Revolt of 1942, as it has been termed, was in fact short-lived.

•	After the suppression of the Revolt of 1942, there was hardly any political activity inside the country till the war ended in 1945.

•	The established leaders of the national movement were behind the bars, and no new leaders arose to take their place or to give a new lead to the country.

•	In 1943, Bengal was plunged into the worst famine in recent history. Within a few months over three million people died because of starvation. There was deep anger among the people for the Government could have pre-vented the famine from taking such a heavy toll of life.

Azad Hind Fauj
•	The national movement, however, found a new expression outside the country's frontiers. Subhas Chandra Bose bad escaped from India in March 1941, went the Soviet Union for help. But when the Soviet Union joined the allies in June 1941, he went to Germany.

•	In February 1943, Bose left for Japan to organize an armed struggle against British rule with Japanese help.

•	In Singapore, Bose formed the Azad Hind Fauj (Indian National Army or INA) to conduct a military campaign for the liberation of India. He was assisted by Rash Behari Bose, an old terrorist revolutionary.
 


 

•	Before the arrival of Subhash Bose, steps towards the organization of the INA had been taken by General Mohan Singh (at that time, he was a captain of the British Indian army).

•	Subhash Bose, who was now called Netaji by the soldiers of the INA, gave his followers the battle cry of 'Jai Hind'.

•	The INA joined the Japanese army in its march on India from Burma. Inspired by the aim of freeing their homeland, the soldiers and officers of the INA hoped to enter India as its liberators with Subhash Bose at the head of the Provisional Government of Free India.

•	With the collapse of Japan in the War during 1944-45, the INA too met defeat, and Subhash Bose was died in an airplane accident on his way to Tokyo.
 











•	The Revolt of 1942 and INA had revealed the heroism and determination of the Indian people.

•	The new struggle took the form of a massive movement against the trial of the soldiers and officers of the INA.

•	The Government decided to put on trial in the Red Fort at Delhi to Generals Shah Nawaz, Gurdial Singh Dhillon, and Prem Sehgal of the INA, who had earlier been officers in the British Indian Army.

•	On the other hand, the Indian people welcomed INA soldiers as national heroes. Huge popular demonstrations demanding their release were held all over the country.

•	This British Government was this time in no position to ignore Indian opinion; even though the Court Martial held the INA prisoners guilty, the Government felt it expedient to set free.

•	The changed attitude of the British Government is explained by the following factors:

o	The war had changed the balance of power in the world; United States of America and the Soviet Union emerged as the big powers and both supported India’s demand for freedom;

o	Even though Britain was on the winning side in the war, its economic and military power was shattered;

o	Having fought and shed their blood for nearly six years (i.e. World War II), they had no desire to spend many more years away from home in India suppressing the Indian people’s struggle for freedom;

o	The British Indian Government could no longer rely on the Indian personnel of its civil administration and armed forces to suppress the national movement. One of the most significant examples was the famous revolt of the Indian naval ratings at Bombay in February 1946. The ratings had fought a seven-hour battle with the army and navy and had surrendered only when asked to do so by the national leaders;

o	The confident and determined mood of the Indian people were now evident that they would no longer in mood to tolerate the humiliation of foreign rule; and
 
Indian History



o	There was large-scale labor unrest and mass strikes all over the country.

Cabinet Mission
•	The British Government, therefore, sent Cabinet Mission in March 1946 to negotiate with the Indian leaders; the terms for the transfer of power to Indians.

•	The Cabinet Mission proposed a two-tiered federal plan, which was expected to maintain national unity while conceding the largest measure of regional autonomy.

•	There was to be a federation of the provinces and the states, with the federal center controlling only defence, foreign affairs, and communications.

•	Both the National Congress and the Muslim League accepted this plan. But the two could not agree on the plan for an interim government, which would convene a constituent assembly to frame a constitution for the free, federal India.

•	The National Congress and the Muslim League also put differing interpretations on the Cabinet Mission scheme to which they had agreed earlier.

•	In September 1946, Interim Cabinet, headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, was formed by the Congress.

•	The Muslim League joined the Cabinet in October after some hesitation; but it decided to boycott the constituent assembly.
 


	








•	On February 20, 1947, Clement Attlee, British Premier, declared that the British would quit India in June 1948.

•	The ecstasy of coming independence was marred by the large-scale communal riots during and after August 1946. The Hindu and Muslim communalists blamed each other for starting the heinous killings and competed with each other in cruelty.

•	Lord Louis Mountbatten, who had come to India as Viceroy in March 1947, worked out a compromise after long discussions with the leaders of the Congress and the Muslim League: the country was to be free but not united.

•	India would be partitioned and a new state of Pakistan would be created along with a free India.

•	The nationalist leaders agreed to the partition of India in order to avoid the large-scale blood bath that communal riots threatened. But they did not accept the two-nation theory.

•	The nationalist leaders did not agree to hand over one-third of the country to the Muslim League as the latter wanted and as the proportion of the Muslims in Indian population would have indicated.

•	The national congress agreed to the separation of only those areas where the influence of the Muslim League was predominant.

•	In the North Western Frontier Province, and the Sylhet district of Assam where the influence of the League was doubtful, a plebiscite was held.

•	The Indian nationalists accepted the partition not because there were two nations in India - a Hindu nation and a Muslim nation, but because of the historical development of communalism, both Hindu and Muslim. In last 70 years, the communalism had created a situation where the alternative to partition was mass killing of lakhs of innocent people in senseless and barbaric communal riots.
 


 

•	The announcement that India and Pakistan would be free was made on 3 June 1947.

•	On 15 August 1947, India celebrated with joy its first day of freedom.

•	After the independence, the princely states were given the choice of joining either of the new states (i.e. India or Pakistan).
 

•	Under the pressure of the popular states’ people's movements and guided by the masterful diplomacy of Sardar Patel (the Home Minister), most of the princely states acceded to India.

•	The Nawab of Junagadh, the Nizam of Hyderabad, and the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir held back for some time.

•	The Nawab of Junagadh, a small state on the coast of Kathiawar, announced accession to Pakistan even though the people of the state desired to join India. In the end, Indian troops occupied the state and a plebiscite was held, which went in favor of joining India.

•	The Nizam of Hyderabad made an attempt to claim an Independent status, but was forced to accede in 1948 after an internal revolt had broken out in its Telengana area and then Indian troops had marched into Hyderabad.

•	The Maharaja of Kashmir also delayed accession to India or Pakistan even though the popular forces led by the National Conference wanted accession to India. However, he acceded to India in October 1947 after Pathans and irregular armed forces of Pakistan invaded Kashmir.

The last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II, also known as Zafar, died in a British prison in Burma in 1862.

